


A DRAVGHT OF ETERNITY.

That Eternitie is litle considered.
THE FIRST STROKE.
O People deuoyde of the spirit of counsell, and vnprouided of true prouidence: God grant thou wouldst be wise, and vnderstanding, and that by a mature foresight, thou couldst reach to the end of future things. These are the words of
the great law giuer of the Iewes, taxing that Nation of inconsideration, of an incircuncised heart, and a stiffe necke, and laying the greatest part of their faults, vpon the litle attention they had to foresee future things. To which pourpose saith S. BERNARD excellently well. In these words of Moyses, three things are recommended vnto vs. Wisdome, Vnderstanding, and Prouidence. And I conceaue them to be assined, and applyed to three times, to represent in vs a Draught of Eternitie. Which we will doe in this manner; in moderating things present by wisdome; in discering things past by the iudgment which we will make of our selues; and by an exacte prudence in disposing our selues for the time to come. An^certes, wisely to dispose of thing present, and seriously to recogitat^ things past in the bitternesse of ou^
soule, is the abridgement, yea the toppe of all spirituall exercises, and the forme of all interiour discipline. To th'end that, according vnto the Apostles Counsell, we may liue in this life soberly, and piously, by obseruing sobriety in the vse of things present; by redeeming with a worthy satisfaction, tyme vnprofitably spent, without gathering any fruit towards our saluation; and by opposing the Buckler of Piety, against the dangers which doe menace vs for the tyme to come, Tell me now my deare Athanasia, whether that with which the diuine MOYSES did so iustly and truely vpbraid the Israelites, may not, and ought not by as good right, be cast in the ^eeth of the new Israel of God, a people of acquisition; and of an acquisition so paynefull and bloody of ^he soules of the greatest part of Christians, redeemed with so great
a price, and with so plentious a redemption since worldlings are so lulled a sleepe in the region of the shadow of death, that they loose the remembrance of this so wholesome a thought of Eternity, which should neuer be razed out of their memory in any moment of this mortall life? Let vs wish in their behalfe, that which the great Conductour of the children of IACOB wished for his bretheren, who was held the swetest and mildest amo^gst men, (what euer be reported of the sharpenesse of his spirit amongst the waters of contradiction) and let vs pronoune of men buried in the dust of this life. I would to God, that the Spirit of wisdome, vnderstanding, and Counsell would descend into their soules, and the diuine goodnesse grant that it way be found in ours, to speake with S. BERNARD, tha^ we may sweetly dispose of thing
present with wisdome; condemne our former offences by a iudicious vnderstanding; and foresee things to come by a clearesighted counsell. God grant we may be wise in our present behauiour; vnderstanding to correct our life past; and prouident for the tyme to come; that by Gods mercy, wee may dy the death of the iust, and our end way be like vnto theirs; and that the end of our life may be precious In the sight of the iust Iudge, who prouids crownes to such as haue lawfully fought. Heauens grant, my Athanasia, that our soule departing this life, may be like vnto the lampe, whose flammes ^re fed by an aromaticall oyle, and which neuer smell so well, as when ^t is extinguished: and that it doth ^nfranchise it selfe out of this clayie ^ouse of our body, for no other end ^ut to breath out it selfe towards ^eauen, leauing the earth embaulmed
with a good odour in IESVS CHRIST; as it is written, that the memory of the iust should be sweete, as the sent of perfumes powered out. Which shall be, most deare soule, if from this vally of teares, we prouide stepps in our hearts towards the blessed eternity; and if vpon each occasion, we eleuate our thoughts thitherwards, thoughts which shall be to God, as that litle rodde of smoake compou^ded of all the perfuming ponders. Whereof mention is made in the heauenly Epithalamion: and if separating our selues from the troopes of those who sleeping in a letergy, amidst their riches, delights, and vanities, shut their eyes against the cleare light of eternity, and repuls^ the rayes of the Sunne of Iustice. Alas, these wretched slaues to the^ owne riches, possessed by the which they thinke they possess^^
sleepe at their ease; passe in an imaginary felicity, the mome^ts of their dayes: but at their awaking, they find their hands empty; put into the waights they are found light; and which is yet worse, in one pointe, in an instant they descend into eternall torments. So slept SAMSON, after he was bereft of his force. TOBIE when he had lost his eyes: and Isboseth when he was depriued of life. God looked downe from his heauenly mansion, saith the kingly Prophets, to see whether amongst men their were any of a good iudgment, and a wise foresight, who sought him as he merits; that is, with his whole heart. But he found that euery one diuerted from his seruice, and conuerted themselues to vaine and vnprofitable things, forsooke the Creatour for the Creature, Eternity for a moment, whereupon none doth doe good, no not one.
The wayes of Syon, that is, of the Blessed Eternity, weepe to see themselues forsaken and aba^doned, none frequenting their solemnities. O Eternity how considerable thou art, but o the misery, and misery vvpon misery, how litle thou art considered!


That all the euill in the world, comes from want of thinking of Eternity.
II.
YET, Athanasia, we may affirme it with an vndaunted bouldnesse, since with an vndoubted truth; all the euill in the world, comes through defaut of this consideration. For Eternity being well waighed, is a light which doth dissipate the shadowes, and disperse the clouds of sinne. Thy iudgment o Lord, are razed out of his memory that offendeth, and thence it is, tha^
he defiles all his wayes, and falls at euery foote, sayth the diuine Psalmist. Where you are to note, that in this place, he speakes of that iudgment, whose irreuocable verdict, shall bring some to eternall rewards, others to eternall paynes. Co^trariwise the same Prophete confesseth, that he betooke himselfe to the workes of Iustice, out of the apprehension he had conceaued of the chaste feare of this eternall iudgment. How can an Archer, (vnlesse by meere chance.) Hit the marke he remarkes not? and how should he arriue at Eternity, that thinks not of it, nor directs his course that way? And with what face, can one that will not follow Gods commandements, begge of him, that he would conduct him in the way of eternity? The generall desolation of the earth, saith IEREMIE, yea the abomination of desolation, is, that
none considers in his heart, that is, seriously, this great and vniuersall end of Eternity, and thence their are so few cleane and ruminating beastes which can be offered to God in the Sacrifice of Iustice. Whence so many shipwrakes in the world, that vast and spacious sea (where so many weake mortall vessels are split against the manifests shelues) but through want of the Co^passe, and for that we direct not our thoughts in the point of Eternity?


How profitable it is to thinke of Eternity.
III.
COntrariwise next to Gods grace, one of the Principles of eternall saluation, is to thinke of it: It is a marke so faire and ample, that he that lookes vpon it, hits it. And who euer hath a firme
and stayed ayme cannot misse this Butt. The meanes to attaine to it, are easie; the wayes sometimes vncouth, are now playne and bet: the mountaines reduced into playnes. The commandements are not hard: the yoake is sweete, and the burthen light. Is it not true Athanasia, that we runne in the wayes of the diuine commandements when heauenly loue extends our heart towards the glorious Eternity? Tis this faire RACHEL that makes our dayes seeme moments; and our labours delights, when we thinke of that pourchace. Is it not this thought that doth furnish vs with Eagles wings, to take a flight without stooping from the wing, by co^tinuing perseuerantly in good: and aydes vs with wings of a done, to mount vp to our true repose, which is no other then Eternity? Marke with what courage this Eagle
speakes, with what sweetnesse and promptitude this done: I haue thought of the dayes of old, and thought againe of the yeares of Eternity. Would you not say, that that were the Center, where all the lynes of their desires meete: that that is their one necessary. It is the haire, in which all the headhaire of the sacred spouse doth end, and the point, wherein all the rayes of her sight, are receaued and stayed. That this point which had neuer any beginning, nor shall haue end, is that litle seed in the Ghospell whence the great trees of all vertues spring: the litle stone of DANIEL, which growes vp to a maine mountaine, MARDOCHEES litle source; which after it had branched out it selfe into faire floodes of good workes, becomes an Oceane of light? Which makes we stick to this Truth, that as the want of this
thought of Eternitie, is cause of the ruine of all the lost soules: so when man prayseth God in this thought, the rest of his thoughts, doe leade him through the pathes of heroicall vertues, to the solemne Feast and delightfull Saboath of Eternitie: For the iust shall liue for euer, and their reward shall be with our Lord; who is himselfe she guerdon of his followers and seruants.


Eternitie is the proper thought of a spirituall man.
IV.
O Thought, Athanasia, passing all other thoughts, and from whence issue, as the beames from the face of the Sunne, all other good thoughts! o oyle that swims aboue all other liquours; oyle of the wise virgins La^pe; oyle of the widowe that neuer fayles; fountaine
of oyle springing towards eternitie! Certes there is no thought more worthy the spirit of man, an immortall spirit, a spirit brother to the Angells, then that of Eternitie: for it is the thought of God, he being eternitie it selfe: throw thy thoughts vpon God, sings the diuine Psalmist, fixe, o man, all thy cares in this heauenly obiect, walke in his sight, and be perfect. what doe I say perfect, it is to be alreadie in a degree of Beatitude, and a Beatitude far greater, then that wherof the faire Queene of Saba spake, when she named those Courtiers blessed, who are dayly in the presence of the wisest of Kings, Since that he, who doth contemplate the King of Kings and Sages, yea wisdome it selfe, drawes from the glorious presence of him who is far other then SALOMON such aduantages, as may be admired, but neuer exprest,
nay nor yet conceaued. o who will fauour vs so much that all our conuersation may be in heauen, as was his, who was rapt vp into the third Heaue^, if not the co^tinuall thought of this eternall obiect, which is the Center of our wishes and desires? o Eternitie, thou art the true Sunne, where the legitimate young Eagles are tryed. Thou art the glorious star towards which all well composed hearts, like spirituall Turne-soles, doe incessantly turne their view; hearts florishing with good desires, and loaden with fruits of good works, their floures being fruits of honour and honestie, that is, extreamely honorable. The great Apostle being returned out of that strong and wo^derfull rapture, and that heauenly schowle, where he had learnt the secreets, which it was not lawfull for a man to speake, being in earth with open and intire eyes saw nothing
at all, (so was he dazled with the rayes of eternitie!) or if he saw any thing, it was but durt, and doung; and the great spirituall Giant of our age, as the deuoute AVILA styles him, the Founder of the Companie of Iesus, when he came out of his Extasies. o, quoth he, how durtie and diminutiue is the earth in my sight, when I consider the beautie and goodlinesse of Heauen! All seemes abiect to true bred soules that ends not in eternitie, nothing is able to bound their desires, saue that obiect which hath no bounds. What can I desire in heauen it selfe, which is the measure of Tyme, and consequently limited: what can I pretend in the earth, which is too wretched and miserable to ingage my affection, which takes a far higher flight. No, o thou God of my heart, goes on the Psalmist, I will haue nothing but thy selfe, thou art my
part foreuer. True it is, I haue but a mortall condition in this vallie of teares, yet my pretensions are not such, they reach to immortalitie. If the passage to eternall solace, ly through the fire and water of sufferance, in lieu of being disamayed at it, I will be comforted in it, knowing that he who alone is of himselfe immortall, becoming mortall for the loue of me, made his entrie into the Temple of Honour, through that of Labour, not permitting himselfe accesse to his owne glorie, but through the doore of dolour. And againe, doth not Faith deliuer as an Oracle, this Apostolicall speech. The light and passing moments of tribulation, doe loade vs with the waight of eternall glorie. Nothing did so powerfully moue that generous mayde of our dayes, the Holy mother TERESA, to so many heroicall enterprises which she vndertooke
for the aduancement of Gods glorie in his Church, by the reformation of a whole Order, as this thought of Eternitie: for being as yet very young, she animated her selfe to pietie, and to the desire of heauenly things, while she conferred with her litle brother (o Litle Angels vpon what can your thoughts be placed but eternitie!) and by this word NEVER which by way of emulation they did often iterate (their thoughts being far more deepe and penetrating in that their tender age, then their words) she layed the fundation of that goodly edifice of perfection, which God hath made appeare in her, making choyce of weake things, to co^found the strong, and by this spirituall Amason, fastening confusion vpon the house of the world, and the Prince of darknesse, a place more disordered, then the house of Nabuchodonosor.
All that is temporall, is reputed as nothing, to a soule whose whole pretensions are set on Eternitie. It is the bird of Paradice, which neuer comes vpo^ the grou^d, but by the thread of meere necessitie. Euerie other obiect is vnworthy of her courage, vnworthy to possesse any place in her affections. It is the true, and onely thought worthy of an immortall, and reasonable spirit.


The sensible man thinks not of Eternitie.
V.
BVt alas the sensible man is not capable of it. I tearme him a sensible man, who depriued of the knowledge of the noblenesse of his beeing, the liuely Image of the diuinitie: walkes after the troopes of brutall passions, feeding the
Bore of his sensualitie, the Lyon of his wroth, the Dragon of his pride, the woolfe of his auarice. This man being aduanced to the honour of reason, and called to the lote of Saints, by the light of grace; hath suffered this light to be obscured, hath not vnderstood who called him to this happie portion, and therfore he hath bene compared to horses without reason, and hath bene made like vnto them. This man hath his eyes fixed in his head, not seeing a hairebread aboue it, or below his feete, a deplorable blindnesse! He is like to those wicked old men who would attempt vpon the honour of the chaste Susanna, who hung downe their heads towards the earth, least they might see heauen. The fire of concupiscence falling into his heart, hinders him to see the Sunne. And albeit naturall light tell him, that his soule is immortall,
yet he turnes it not vpon eternitie; because his owle-like eyes, are not able to sustayne so gratefull a splendour. No, for the shine of the day-starre which is so louely in it selfe, and so beloued of pure eyes whose aples are strong, is dreaded of such as haue a weake and waterie sight. O how miserable is this vnfortunate man, this child of darknesse, this almost blind, and so weake-sighted Heli, that he cannot see the lampe of Syons eternall Temple, saue onely when it is extinguished; how miserable, I say, is this man, since the light that is in him, is darknesse, and couered with so many ashes, that it is quite smothered: and what great hazard he runs of loosing the eternall light of glorie, who walkes in so palpable darknesse, and is buried in the shadowes of so black an obliuion!



Sinne depriues vs of the consideration of Eternitie.
VI.
YOu will happily aske me, o Athanasia, whence proceeds so deepe a blindnes, and so deadly a numnesse in this poore man, who rarely or neuer thinkes of eternitie. To speake the truth, the heauens stand astonished, and the gards of those heaue^ly Gates quake with desolation in it; because that miserable man in the same instant, commits two greiuous crymes, leauing the source of life of the blessed eternitie, to build vnto himselfe with the length of tyme, and in earth, runing cisternes, which can hold no water; because here below we all die, and flow as waters vpon the face of the earth, till we be arrested in our coffin. I neede
not seeke far to find the origine of this disorder, sith that sinne is the prime cause of this blindnesse. My vertue hath forsaken me, quoth the king of penite^ts and Prophetes after his fall, and the light of myne eyes is no longer with me. That each sinner is blind, is a truth so cleare that it needs no proofe: Leaue them there, saith our Sauiour speaking of certaine offenders, they are blind, in a blindnesse signified by that of Tobie, and Samson, and by the palpable darknesse of Egipt. And if while the skie is loaden with fogie mists, we neither discouer Sunne nor heauen, or to speake with Dauid, while rayne makes black and darksome clouds appeare: much lesse can the soule couered with the filme of sinne, see and contemplate him, who shines fro^ aboue the eternall mountaines; for the true and diuine wisdome, takes not vp his resideme in a
soule defiled with the malice of sinne; nor in a bodie subiect to sense and passion. And if, nor the light of the sunne, nor of a torch can be decerned through grosse bodies, as might be a wall; much lesse can eternall thoughts shine in a soule, where sinne erects a wall, which doth separate from his grace, who makes not onely, as Iob sayth, the East, and the starrs, but euen Eternitie it selfe. o miserable soule, who feedes the flockes of thy durtie passions in a land far distant from God, far from true felicitie; for saluation is far from sinners. Lost soules! since such as stray from God doe perish. o God whom thou dost forsake, shall be forsaken; well may their names be written in the land of the deade, but neuer in that of the liuing, nor in the Register of the glorious Eternitie. Iesus preserue vs, my Athanasia, from so daunting a
malediction, vs I say, who by the grace of God, doe detest, the disasterous night of sinne, being receaued out of the tempests of darknesse. We who loue the day light, and sweetly walke therin; we who put of the workes of darknesse, and put on armour of light to walke honestly before God, Angells and men. We who protest that we were nether borne nor doe liue, for any other end but incessantly to contemplate, not the Heauens and the Sunne, as that auncient Anaxagoras said of himselfe, but the blessed Eternitie, and the first cause therof. We who sing with the royall Prophete. Myne eyes are alwayes towards the eternall God: I haue him alwayes before my face: he is the onely obiect of myne eternall thoughts.



Things present doe hinder the contemplation of Eternitie.
VII.
THere is yet another thing, that causeth worldlings to loose the memorie of Eternitie; and the sight of this POLESTARRE, in the nauigation of this mortall life. Doe you desire to know it, Athanasia? It is the things present. The world is full of a kind of people, who are onely worldly wise, knowing onely terreane things, and with these they haue their vnderstanding endarkned, as the Apostle speakes, who search onely the things that are vpon the earth, not the things aboue; and who resembling the vncleane beastes, haue their eyes so fixedly turned vpon the earth, that they cannot recouer them to heauenward, vnlesse
themselues be ouerturned. That we are not to admire, that Eternitie hath so few contemplatours, seeing that the auncient Philosopher hath so many disciples, who said, that the things which are aboue vs, doe no wayes concerne vs. Verily as it is imposible with one ey to see heaue^ and earth, and to behold in the same place the Artique and Antartique Pole, though a man were euen placed vnder the Equature, or the Equinoctiall line; so is it impossble, that the mynd of man should in one thought accompanie present and future, temporall and eternall things. Those twinns are incompatible, and would cause in it too griping conuulsions: Things visible are te^porall, and eternall things are not seene, saith the Doctor of the Gentiles, like as one of the Poles is inuisible vnto vs, and farr moe Pilotes know how to sayle, vnder that of our Orison, then vnder that of the
Antipodes, that being vnknowen vnto vs, and subiect to other starrs, and other rules of nauigation. We must not therfore wonder that so few direct their course towards Eternitie, and that TYME hath so great a trayne; since the MAXIMES of temporall and eternall things are not onely different, but often also contrarie, and alwayes further dista^t then Heauen and Earth. The soule betwixt these two Extreamities is like vnto the child in the EMBLEME, being hoysted vp by the wings of it desire to things of the next life, but kept downe to things of the present life, by the stone of this earthly habitatio^, abating the flight of the Spirit towards things aboue. It is this Talent of leade, mentioned by the Prophete, which swayes downe to the ground, such as desire to be freed from it, and yet ca^not, so faint hearted they are to performe^
the good which they desire onely with an imperfect will! For if they desired it with an absolute will, and to that effect imployed the power they haue, Grace would neuer quite them in so faire a way. Thus did the youngman in the Gospell, who shewed himselfe so desirous to vndertake the wayes of eternall life, wherof he made so earnest a Petition to our Sauiour: but when he had learnt that to enter thither by the straight way and narrow Gate, he was to forsake his present possessions, to aspire with more facilitie to the Treasures of Eternitie, he returned sad, and administred occasion to the sonne of God to make that sweete discourse to his disciples, of the difficultie of entering into heauen, with the loade of riches. For which cause Sainte Augustine tearmed the loue of present things, the glew which glewes the feathers
of the mynd, and hinders her flight towards Eternitie. While the Christall is sole, and in her natiue puritie; it is transparent, and in it are seene the obiects put before it: but being once spred ouer with leade or quicksiluer, our sight is stayed in the Glace, and by reflection, we see the picture of what is before it, and not at all that which is behind it. A neate and purified spirit, not soyled with the lees and skumme of terreane affections, Hath by the light of Fayth a cleare Prospect vpon Eternitie, and the things of the next life: But as soone as it applyes it selfe to earthly obiects; It discryes nothing but the fayding shapes of this world. And as hounds fall easily at default in the Spring, when the fresh smells of flowres, make them loose the sent of the game they poursue: So the mynd that is carried to the search of heauenly things,
runns counter, misled by the neerenesse of present things.


That we put a rate vpon present things rather by their neerenesse then worth.
VIII.
FOr though many of those that are carried away by their allurements, know well that they are not comparable in worth to eternall things, yet rather by their neighbourhoode then valour, they make a stronge impression. Who would not say that the full moone is greater the^ the starrs, it appearing as another Sunne amongst the lesser lightes, which the night discouers in the heauens: yet is it not so, as the Astrologers assure vs, but her proxmitie causeth this mistake. Present things obnoxious to the decay of tyme, are so short in continuance;
that they are but flying vapours, as soone bet downe, as blowen vp, seeming rather appearances, or the shadowes of a dreame, then solidities; while yet beeing neerer, they appeare to the eyes of such as muse, or rather abuse themselues therin, more worthy of consideration then eternall things, which are not limited in their extention, nor haue end in their beeing. And who knowes not, (to keepe in our comparison) that the influences of this starre, the nights great eye, are more forceable then any other, excepting that which is the fountaine of all light, and which doth communicate it to all the rest? We must say the like of things present, that by reason of their neerenesse, they strike the soule, by the senses, a more violent blow, then the future doe, which are beheld, as a thing in absence. Whence we haue a MAXIME; that
present obiects moue the powres, which things in distance doe but slowly shake. But all this proceeds from want of Fayth, as hereafter we will declare; for if this vertue were closely vnited in the mynds of those, that doe beleeue her propositions, she would make things hoped for, appeare as present, inuisible things visible, according to the definition therof deliuered vs by the great Apostle. The Moone appeares in diuers shapes, or altogether disappeares, according to the different oppositions of the earth, betweene it and the Sunne. We may say the like in the matter we treate of, that Eternitie is seene, or shut vp from soules, according as they are more or lesse infected with earthly affections. o Loue of the world how long wilt thou obscure the faire light of heauenly loue: o thicke cloude why dost thou shut from so
many eyes, the aspect of the glorious rayes issuing from eternall lights? behold this torch throwen downe: the waxe which while it was below the flame did feede it, is the very bane of it: The loue of inferiour things, guided according to the order of Charitie; doth not impeach eternall loue; but when perishable things are preferred before those that are permanent, then this cleare lampe, which shines to our feete to conduct vs in the way of eternall peace, being smothered with materiall things, dies out. o Smoke! o vnfortunate dung! how many Tobies thou beatest blind? Iron doth naturally run after the Loadstone, yet many things hinder this stones attraction, as when it is rubd with garlike or greese, when it is neere vnto a Diamant, or when it is placed in too great a dista^ce from the iron. And our soules, who of their owne
natures are immortall, by their owne instinct doe tend to Eternitie, as to that which they most affect; but as soone as the garlike or greese of the pleasures, and delights which are tasted in things present, doe attrape them; or when the lying luster of worldly honours keepes them at a gaze, it is not strange, that Eternitie, which they behold as a thing a far of, doth so litle worke vpon their affections. Shall I speake in a word what is the Remora, which stops the shippe of our hearts, vnder the sayles of our desires sayling towards Eternitie? it is, that euery one seekes himselfe, and not the glorie of God. It is, as that old Antipheron, that in euery thinge hauing our eyes turned vpon our selues, in euery thing we seeke our owne interest. Few hate their soules in this world to gayne them to Eternitie. Few renounce all things present; and yet
fewer themselues, who are more, not onely present, but pressing, to follow Iesus Christ, and to doe the will of God in earth, as it is in heauen.


The weaknesse of Fayth, makes Eternitie lesse considerable.
IX.
BVt what doe I say to doe the will of God, Alas! how many wicked, how many mad men, say in their heart, their is no God. Our lipps are to our selues, who is our Lord? Come let's crowne our selues with present roses, before death, the death of all pleasures, make them fade away; let not a flowre of vanitie, of loose desire, of lucre, put vp the heade in the meades of this mortall life, which we take not a taste of, before the graue shut vs vp. And it is there that this want of beleife maks vs loose the veiw of the
North-starre of Eternitie which I giue for a third cause. Yes, quoth our Sauiour himselfe to his Disciples, doe you thinke that the sonne of man coming to iudge the world, in his last coming, shall find Faith in the earth? and doe we thinke there is Faith in this end and dreges of ages wherin we liue? Verily if we forme a iudgement of Faith by workes, as the scripture teacheth vs, it will easily be gathered by the fruite the world brings out, that there is nether Truth, nor Faith, nor Memorie of Gods iustice, or Eternitie, left in the heart of man. All erre from their mothers wombe, and stray from the pathes of equitie, being heauie hearted, and slow to beleeue that which is taught them by faith touching things to come. They loue vanitie, and seeke after falsitie and lyes. o how deceitfull are the children of men in their waightes, suffering
themselues to be deceaued in the Vanitie of their senses. Let vs consider this more neerely, and practically. Faith tells vs many glorious things of the Citie of God, where he raignes eternally with his Elect, where he makes his loue take roote as in a fertile feild. It tells vs, that this Kingdome is of all ages; that all the Blessed are Kings; heires of God, and coheires with Iesus Christ. That God is there, all in all filling them with an eternall felicitie: that his power is an eternall powre: That his Kingdome shall haue no end. And in our Crede we protest, that we beleeue life euerlasting the life of the world to come, That such as doe well shall enter into the blessed Eternitie; and the wicked into an eternall torme^t. That is one of the principale articles of our Faith, and as it were, the pinne vpon which the rest moue and turne: for if all should die to vs
togeither with the body; if there remaynd no hope if another life, doth not the Apostle say plainely, that vnder our Christian law, we were the most miserable creatures aliue. But o God how weake and faint is faith in these articles, if we look vpon the liues of most Christians? o sinners, who beleeue so well, and liue so ill, hauing onely a deade Faith, not quickned with Charitie, nor seconded with workes suiting with your beleife, doe you not blush to see your hands contrarie to your tongues, your actions to your words, and so great contradiction in your selfe, by the continuall warre which your will makes against your vnderstanding, whence is bred in your heart that remorse and griping, that gnawing worme, which permits you not euen in your pleasures, false follies and superfluities, any contentment, that is
pure and without mixture of bitternesse, tempering your laughter with greife, and ouersowing a thousand thornes amongst the roses of your fleeting delightes. o miserable wretches! willingly would I say, ether liue as you beleeue, or beleeue as you liue, not crucifying a new againe the sunne of God by your vices, and that far more cruelly and vnworthyly, then the executioners did to the crosse betwixt two theeues, vpon the Mount-Caluarie: for the scripture assures vs, that if they had knowen him, as you professe to doe, to be the King of glorie, they had neuer treated him so barbarously; but you barbarously crucifie him, not now in his passing and passible life, nor vpon Mount-Caluarie, nor yet betwixt two theeues, but euen set at the right ha^d of the maiestie of the Highest, and raigning in the Eternitie of
ages, betwixt the Father and the Holy Ghost. What doe you thinke, Athanasia, of the infidelitie, or crueltie, of the most part of wicked liuers, who haue the face to professe themselues of the faythfull? Yet if they beleeued as they liue, their actions would be like their beleife, and as Ethnikes, vpon whom the light of truth hath not shun, they would be lesse punished: but the seruant that knowes the will of his maister, and doth it not, merits he not a double punishment? And these wilfully blind creatures, deserue they not to fall into the accursed ditch, full of snares of fire and brimstone, and to haue part in the chalice of eternall tempests and tormoyles?



Origene's errour touching the Eternitie of the paines of Hell.
X.
ANd it happens somes tymes that for the punishment of this contradiction betwixt their life and beleife, God permits them to fall into a reprobate sense, and suffers them to perish in the Deluge of their errour, leauing them in the obscuritie of their vnderstanding, to walke in the vanitie of their thoughts, poursuing the desires of their hearts, following the straying rowtes of their owne inuentions. Alas who would not tremble, who would not quake with feare, to see this mightie, this prodigious, this incomparable wit, Origene, fallen into this errour, to beleeue that after a longe continuance of torments, the damned should be drawen out
of Hell, to inioy the vision of God: and this, because he could not comprehend eternall torments, which are so rightuous in Gods iustice. This so learned, and well disposed a man, who knew all the Scripture, did he not find in a thousand places of these diuine writts, that there is nothing more inculcated, nor more solidly proued, then eternall fire, then the immortall worme, then eternall death? So true it is that Faith and experience are incompatible, that to vnderstand we must beleeue, and to beleeue, we must captiuate our vnderstanding; and the soule that doth imbarke her selfe vpon the Ocean of the misteries of our beleife taking humane reason for her guide suffers a woefull shipwrake in the midst of the course of her nauigation. While the discouerie of the Indians had not yet brought vs the newes of a new world, situated
vnder another Pole, and another Horison then ours, the opinion of the Antipodes was laught at; learned men improued it; and S. Augustine himselfe held it ridiculous. But this concernes this world onely, not eternall saluation. The errour is far more dangerous which stumbles at the Eternitie of paynes, because it takes also away the Eternitie of recompences: ouerthrowes the truth of the soules immortalitie, brings a foote againe the fopperies of transanimation, or passage of soules out of one body into another, and breakes downe the fundations of all truth. Yet this great wit, and withall of so good a life, suffered shipwrake vpon this shelfe, blinded in his owne imaginations, as the auncient Philosopher, who lost his sight; by fixing it too setledly vpon the globe of the Sunne, experiencing the Truth of this oracle, who too curiously
searcheth into the secreetes of the diuine Maiestie, shall be oppressed which the greatnesse of his glorie. It shall suffice vs for the present, to oppose the strong buckler of our beleife against this errour, a buckler, not onely of a double, but a centuple temper, and not pearceable by the darts of humane reason, since the scripture (which we will shew in its place) doth minace nothing more frequently, nor establish nothing more strongly, then eternall punishments prepared for the Diuel, his Angells Apostates, and all such as by sinne shall betake themselues to that reuoulted crue's side. We will ponder the reason of this eternall curse, as the order of this subiect shall require.



Eternitie cannot be defined.
XI.
NOw I set vpon the hardest peece of my taske, to wit the begining; and who knowes not that a good begining is halfe the deede doing? And who can be ignora^t, that to enter into a discourse, and put ones selfe vpon it by a reasonable conduct, an ouerture must be made vnto it, by the definition of the subiect which a man is about to handle? And here it is, that euen at the very threshwood, my pen falls out of my hand, since the matter, wherof I am about to represent a poore draught, is none of those that can be defined: for I pray you, Athanasia, this word, Definition, doth it not sound as it were some finite thing? And what proportion can an infinite thing beare with a finite, or
what line can measure an infinite thinge? Now Eternitie being of this nature, who sees not, that no definition can comprehend or compasse that, which in it selfe hath no bound. To what end then should we offer to shut vp wthin the termes of a definition, that which neuer had begining, nor shall haue end? were it not to essay to shut vp the Ocean in a shell, according as an Angell in a childs liknesse said to S. Augustine, while he proiected in his vnderstanding, that admirable worke of the Trinitie which he left vs? And tell me, how can that flow from a slender penne, or be exprest by a drope of inke, which cannot enter into the imagination, nor the vnderstanding of man, who being finite, is in no sort able to contayne an infinite thing, such as is Eternitie? In vaine therfore haue some great and curious witts strayned themselues
in defining a thinge indefinite, and which is much better conceaued by admiration, then discourse.


That Eternitie is incomprehensible.
XII.
FOr in your opinion, Athanasia, what is Eternitie but God himselfe, who is not onely eternall, but Eternitie it selfe, and wherin that wich we call Eternitie doth so subsiste, that without its being, which is eternall, Eternitie should not bee at all. When therfore we name Eternitie, let vs say with the great Stoicke speaking of the termes of Fortune, Prouidence, and destinie, that we onely change Gods name into another, and that it is the diuinitie which we name by paraphrase. For sithens, according to the Diuine's Axiome, all that is in God is God himselfe, because, he is all
Essence without any accidents, all the qualities which we applie vnto him by way of Attributes, to speake of his greatnesse, according to our weaknesse and manner, that is, in a stutting wise, are no other thing then himselfe, though diuersly considered by vs, his vnitie comprehending in it selfe by way of emine^cie all the multiplicitie of our thoughts. So that when we name his Wisdome, Goodnesse, Iustice, Powre, Immensitie, Eternitie, and a thousand other magnificences we attribute vnto him, we co^sider this Sunne in his beames, which are all begun and ended in himselfe. It is he then that hath not onely immortalitie, as the scripture faith, but euen Eternitie: and who being without begining or end, (though the begining and end of all things) is by a necessarie consequence Eternitie it selfe. Iudge you now, Athanasia, if it would not be,
not onely a temeritie, but euen a manifest follie, to essay the defining of him, who is, as an aunciant father said, incomprehensible to euerie thought, and ineffable to euery created tongue.


Eternitie is ineffable.
XIII.
ANd how doe you thinke, said the same father, that that should fall within the compasse of a style, or be expressed by words, which neuer entered the eare, which was neuer discouered by the eye, nor was euer apprehended by any humane conceipt: and he speakes there of the felicities, which God hath prepared in his Eternitie, for such as loue him, and such as he hath predestinated to his glorie. What will then Eternitie it selfe be, if its beames be so daseling,
its delightes so ineffable? A smale scantling of this Beatitude appearing in the eyes of S. Peter vpon Mount-Thabor, did blind, or rauish and transport him in such sort that not knowing what he said, he dema^ded of his deare transfigured maister, to erect there three Tabernacles, as though he had would before his sufferances, haue established his repose in that place for euer. The prophete hauing seene onely the Almightie, in passing, as the diuines speake, was so estonished at it, that receauing from him Commission to denounce his pleasure to his people, he cryed out, Lord I am a child who am onely able to cry, a, a, a, I cannot speake: the least communication of the Almightie being ineffable. And the great Apostle being rapt vp into the third heauen, where he learnt newes of Eternitie, confessed after he was returned out of his rapture,
that they were secretes that could not be related. And Moyses hauing onely sene God by the shoulders, that is to say, in his workes, as some interpreters vndersta^d it, he is taken with such an admiratio^, that hauing receaued co^mandement to denounce vnto Pharao Heauens doome, he pretends for excuse, his tongues disabilitie, which is an euident signe, that the Almightie, is ineffable, as well in himselfe, as in his workes. Whence the auncient Egiptians in their simbolicall diuinitie, represented the Dietie in the shape of a Crocodille, a beaste which is said to haue no tongue, to intimate, that it is not possible to speake as one ought of a maiestie so high, and eleuated beyond all vnderstanding.



An imperfect description of Eternity.
XIV.
TRue it is notwithstanding (to th'end we may giue some ouerture to a thought and a discourse in a subiect, which of it selfe is incomprehensible and ineffable) that considering Eternitie as a certaine thing abstracted from the Diuinitie, in qualitie of a diuine Attribute, we may in some sort, not indeed define, yet describe it, and forme some imperfect draught therof, where we may, by better reason, adde that, which that auncient Painter was wont to put vpon his admirable Pourtraitures, Appelles made this, signifying therby, that he had not giuen the last touch to his worke; or els, that his imagination past that which his pincell had
put downe. Without saying then with Simonides, who was asked touching the Dietie, that the more he considered it, the more he found to be considered in it, being a botomelesse Abisse. And without respiting the resolution of the point, for the space of a hundred yeares to come, a tyme wherin we shall not be vpon the face of the earth, following the Areopagians, who remitted to a like tearme, the decision of an inuincible difficultie. We thinkes we may say of Eternitie, that it is no other thinge, then a continuance which hauing no begining, shall also haue no end. In these few words (in my conceipt) as in the hollow of one of those mirrors, which from their effect, are termed burning glasses, the beames of this great Sunne of Eternitie are receaued. Whose present being perpetuated, is of a more large extent then either the tyme
past or tyme to come, since they are bounded by tyme, but Eternitie is infinitely beyond any tyme imaginable. I am not ignorant, that this shortning description brings downe the mountaine Athos, to be a moate in the Sunne; makes the Sunne be seene in a Bason; and imitates the Geographers who show the whole vniuerse in the compasse of a smale Mappe. But euen as the same Geographers being come to the extreamities of any Land, made knowen vnto them by their Art, represent vnto vs the Sea's illimited vastnesse, giuing vs therby to vnderstand, that they make no further discouerie: so in this matter of Eternitie, all that we can doe, is to make vs loose our veiw in the boundlesse sight, of a thing past, which neuer had begining; and of a thing to come, which shall neuer haue end. Whence it comes to passe, that as there is no
pencell that can euer represent the Sunne to the life, nor the aires transpare^cie, nor yet the fires liuelinesse; so is there no plume of so high a flight, as to arriue at the representation of Eternitie. And that Auncient Painter; who put such a rate on his owne Peeces, as that he said of them, that they were painted onely for Eternitie, would haue had his hands full in representing Eternitie it selfe, for which he said he laboured with such art, and strife of mynd.


What Tyme is.
XV.
BVt to come to that indirectly, which we cannot directly attaine vnto, me thinkes we shall bring some light into this obscuritie, by comparing contraries together; and by considering Tyme which we know, we may make
our selues some way to the knowledge of Eternitie, at whose greatnes we stand amaysed. So the Apostle teacheth vs to search out the inuisible things of God, by the footsteps of such things as he hath made visible vnto vs. But is it possible that Tyme, which is so litle and diminutiue a thing, should rayse vs to the knowledge of Eternitie which is incomprehensible and ineffable? The Geometritions, who take the measure of all solide bodyes from a point which is not, and which not being found in nature, is onely in the imagination, make a breach to this thought, and make vs hope the effect of the proposition of that incomparable Auncient Mathematician, who demanded onely a point out of the earth, wherin he might place his engine, to shake the whole masse of the vniuerse, which hath no other fundation, as the Prophete saith, then its
owne waight and stabilitie. What is Tyme then properly speaking, but an instant, as litle perceptible, as the mathematicall point? It is a moment cutting of things past from things to come; and which, more quicke then quicksiluer, runs away being presst, and slides out of his hand, that striues to hold it. In naming it, we loose it, so subtile and glib is it by nature. It were to waygh the fire, and measure the wind, according to the tearmes of the Prophete, to striue to stay this Protheus: In an insta^t he vanisheth: and while you thinke to shew him with your finger, he is gone. To count tyme past, with Tyme, were impertinent, since now it is not; nor hath that which is not, any qualities, saith the Philosophers Maxime. And yet should we lesse iustly, attribute vnto Tyme, the tyme to come, which as yet hauing no beeing, can be no other wise instyled, then with
the name of nothing. What is Tyme then, but an instant, so closely inuironned, or rather, asseiged with a not-beeing, that in thinking to hold, or shew it, it is alreadie slid from its beeing in nature. Such as haue endeuoured to shew its incomprehensible litlenesse, giue it a litle more scope, imitating therin the Geometritions, who draw their points into lines, their lines into superficies, and their superficies into bodies, vpon which they exercise the Rules of their Art. For to make vs vndersta^d, that Tyme is no other thinge, then the measure of the PRIMVM MOBILE, they were constrayned to gather together as many instants, as are conteyned in 24. howres, composing therof a reasonable distance, whervpo^ to enlarge their discourse. Wherin they haue followed Democrites fantasie, who composed the world of a collection of atomes,
bringing to a grosse bodie many pettie percells, which according to the signification of the word, haue no body at all, which are emptie and almost chimericall imaginatio^s. As then (following the Maximes of Philosophie) Arithmetique, being come to the number of tenne, which is a full and perfect nu^ber, is forced to begin againe, extending its multiplication to infinitie; and as all that is written, is framed out of 24. letters; euen so, the course of the PRIMVM MOBILE, whose violence drawes about with it all the other Spheres, is ended in the distance of 24. houres, though in proper speach Tyme be but an indiuisible, and almost imperceptible instant. Wence the length of ages, yeares, and mo^thes, is drawen from the multiplication of dayes; as also the length of dayes from that of houres; and houres by the asse^bling
of many instants. Whervpon the Scripture in the Actes, and in the first Epistle to the Thessalonensians, ioyne together those words, Tymes, and moments, to teach vs that Tyme (a thing which should be so precious vnto vs, and wherof alone, according to an Auncient, the auarice is laudable) consists onely of moments; moments so short and light, that the Scripture in an other passage, represents them onely, by the twinkling of an eye. Goe mortells and plot great matters; let your proiects, in your imagination, reach to Eternitie: you who haue onely the present tyme, that is, a moment, in your power, and a mome^t which is lost in the very instant, in which you thinke to graspe it, being a shadow which flyes such as follow it. Who would not stand amaysed at the blind madnesse of most men, who build their hopes vpon things
so frayle; and comforting themselues in the expectation of a fortune, say as they beleeue, that Tyme workes all; miserably for saking the pretensions of the blessed Eternitie, for flitting moments, which like to lightning, meete with death in their birth. Vnaduised Atalantases, who for aples not of gold, but gilt onely, stoppe the course of their best designes, and loose the aples, or rather, the crownes of Eternitie.


Eternitie compared to Tyme.
XVI.
TO what end shall we now place thi great torch of Eternitie, before the eyes of those blind wretches, who are diued so deepe into the darknesse of Tyme, that they are not able to sustayne the shine of so glorious a light? Yet let vs not omit, Athanasia, for the
consolation of the good, to strike sparkes of fire out of Tyme, which we haue represented in so smale a shape, and reduced to simple moments, to the extent of that vast Eternitie, whose immensitie doth swallow vp all ages imaginable. I must confesse there is alwayes some imperfection, in the comparison of things disproportionable. For to say it is to place a flie by an Elephant; a moate by a mountaine: to compare a drope of water with the whole Ocean; and earth to Heauen, which in regard of the Heaue^ly Spheeres, appeares but as an imperceptible point; all this is to say nothing; or if to say any thing, it is to make knowne the weaknesse of mans wit, and imbecillitie of his imagination. Lets hoyste vp the sayles of our thought, and say, that Eternitie doth as farre out strippe yeares and ages, as the great Sunne the
lesser starrs, eclipsing all their light as soone as it appeares in the Horison. And if Antiquitie represented Tyme in Saturne who deuoured his owne children, for that it doth incessantly nible away the moments, houres, dayes, monthes, yeares, and ages: Eternitie infinitly passing Tyme doth swallow it vp as a point; and when Tyme shall cease to bee, Eternitie shall thrust out its continuance into a NEVER, which shall neuer haue end, as it neuer had begining. It is too sparingely spoken to call it an Abisse that cannot be sou^ded: that it is an Ocean receauing all the waters of the world, without being augmented. Nay rather let vs apply vnto it, that which the Auncient Philosopher applyed vnto the Diuinitie, that Eternitie is a circle, whose center is extended euerie where, and whose circunference hath no bounds. O Eternitie cryes
out a deuoute personage, who is able to conceaue what thou art? I propose vnto my selfe a thousand yeares; I conceaue a thousand thousand yeares; I passe in imagination as many millions of ages, as are moments in tyme, from the begining of the world, and yet haue I found nothing that comes neere to Eternitie. o Eternitie thou shalt co^tinue for euer and euer: what is it to say for euer and euer? It is to say euerlastingly. But what will euerlastingly say? it is a thing that passeth the reach of all humaine capacitie. If we say with the Angell of the Schowle, that it is an immoueable durance whose continuation shall neuer fayle, how shall we compare it with Tyme, whose continuance is cut of by euerie moment, and which would cease to bee, if God by an onely word should stop the motion of the Heauens. If we say with the
Apostle of France, that it is an immortall thing, incorruptible, inuariable, hauing its beeing all at once: how can we compare it with Tyme which is a variable, corruptible, changeable, mortall thing, and whose beeing consists onely of a succession of instants? a transitorie beeing, which subsists onely by a flux of moments, which tend continually to ruine, and change as many faces, as it conteynes instants, which made Iob say, that the life of man doth neuer remayne in the same state. For since it is but a successio^ of dayes, who knowes not, that though some dayes resemble others, yet are they neuer the same? If we say with a Christian philosopher in his Consolatio Philosophiae, that Eternitie is an indiuisible and accomplished beeing, without end or limite, who sees not that it is the true conterpoise of Tyme, whose imperfect beeing is bounded with
euerie insta^t? If we say with another Doctor, that it is a present without either praeter-perfect, or future Tyme; and a spheere whose center is continually without any circuit at all, who sees not that it is to drinke vp Tyme into a nothing, to place a thinge so litle, beside so huge a thinge? Yes verily, heauen and earth shall passe, and shall be worne like a garment, but Eternitie shall be still itselfe, and its consta^t and perpetuall youth shall neuer waxe old.


An eleuation of the mynd to God, vpon the comparison of tyme to Eternitie.
XVII.
O Eternall God who art authour of Tyme, yet makest thyne abode in Eternitie, and whose gouernement, and Royaltie doth extend it selfe PLVS VLTRA: adorable Dietie who art from Eternitie
to Eternitie: that is to say; without begining or end, subsisting eternally by thy selfe; who art seated vpon thyne eternall Throne: whose power is an eternall power; and whose Kingdome is the Kingdome of all ages: bring to passe o great God by that mercy, which thou eternally builsted in heauen, that the consideration of the immense and incomprehensible greatnes of eternitie, may be so liuely imprinted vpon our heart, that the affections which linke them in so strong bands to tra^sitorie things, and to the moments of things temporall, may be so weakened, or rather brought to nothing, that nothing may stay vs here below, or hinder our course toward the goale of eternall felicitie. Take vs by the right hand, o Lord, conduct vs to thy glorie, by the royall way of thy heauenly will and leade vs in the eternall way
Thou o great Iesus, sonne of the eternall liueing God, who art, our way, Truth, and life direct our steps in the way of true life. And which is this true life, but life euerlasting? which is nothing els but to see thee in the bosome of the Father, who begets the great TO-DAY of Eternitie. Rayse vp the abbated currage of mortalls, and readuance their drooping thoughts towards their origine. Let them take so full a taste of the Manna of the blessed Eternitie, that things possessed in Tyme may become loathsome vnto them. Let them repute all tyme vaine, in respect of Eternitie. Grant, o Lord, that this wholsome thought may be so deeply engraue^ in our memorie, that it may serue as a threade to conduct vs in the Labirinth of the worlds malice; and that we may passe through the vse of temporall things with so well a directed
conduct, that we may not loose eternall.


Mans life compared to the worlds continuance.
XVIII.
ANd if all the continuance of Tyme be so litle in respect of Eternitie, as I haue declared vnto you, what shall the course of mans life be, if we compare it, I will not say to Eternitie, (for the distance is too great) but onely to the continuance of the world? How many men (tearmed by the old Philosopher the litle worlds) hath this world (which the same Philosopher tearmed the great man) deuoured? How many liues haue and shall runne out, since the begining of the world, to the consummation therof? Truly it is not imaginable, though other wise finite
and limited by number and season. If you aske the wisest of men, who was wise too by a heauenly wisdome, to what he doth compare the shortnes of mans life, he will tell you that it resembles a shadow, which soudainly vanisheth; a courser which passeth with a mimble speede; a vessell on the sea vnder full sayles in a fauorable gale which swiftly glides ore the waues; The flight of a bird, which with a strong and liuely winge cuts the aire; and an arrow, which being shot from a strong and forcible arme, flies home to the marke. If you moue Iob vpon this point he will tell you, that the dayes of man are verie short vpo^ the earth; that his life is a vapour, as soone cast downe, as drawen vp: that it is a winde, whose measure is short, nor can it be extended, a measure so smale, saith the Psalmist, that its substance is a verie nothing: and
withall a measure which is in his hands, who keepes the key of life and death: It is not in the hands of men, to th'end that liuing in so great an vncertaintie, he may not rely vpon the continuance of his dayes nor trust to the common course of nature, an errour too too ordinarie. Measure me a blast of wind, and waigh me a flame, said a Prophete, speaking of the lightnes and vanitie of earthly things, the shape and desire of which passe like a floode. But be it, that all these things had some waight, and soliditie, yet since their vse cannot exceede the course of this mortall life, one may clearely discouer, that they leaue but vpon a slender reede, and an earthly fundation. For if our life, compared to the worlds continuance, be but a moment; what a inconceaueable part of a nothing will it be, if we add, that the worlds continuance, (what euer we fayne
to our selues of the length of it) is but a mome^t in respect of Eternitie? A thousand yeares before the face of the Eternall God, saith the Psalmist, is but as yesterday which is past. And all the yeares of men, is but as the watch of a might which is reputed for nothing. This causeth Iob to say, that all the glorie of man, is as a dreame that vanisheth, and cannot be recalled; and that it passeth like vnto a nightly vision. Verily all these descriptions dictated by the Holy Ghost, are liuely pictures of the vanitie, and Nothing of man's life, whose durance is so short, that an onely instant doth often separate the Cradle and Graue. All that we see is but a point, saith the great Stoicke, yea lesse then a point, if any thing lesse can be imagined. Shall we then gruge at the moments of tribulatio^ which doe afflict vs therin, which being well husbanded doe
worke in vs a crowne of eternall glorie. No No, what sufferances soeuer doe vexe vs in this dying life, they enter into no comparison, with the glorie which shall one day be reuealed vnto vs.


The force of the thought of Eternitie.
XIX.
NO neuer, Athanasia, though our mynd turne it selfe on euerie side and make choyce of subiects most pregnant to moue it, and to giue it the most forceable impressions, to imbrace good, or auoyd euil, neuer shall it light vpon any thought so fruitfull to produce this effect, as the thought of Eternitie. O mome^ts, you are but chaffe, and dust before the face of this great wind. This is the great vanne which can separate the corne from the
chaffe, and separate precious from vile things. Eternitie is that Moyses his rod, able to deuoure the serpents of our sinns; and to draw water from rockes, that is, can beget compunction in the most flintie heart. It is a violent blast, which driues vs forwards towards the Desert of pena^ce; which vrgeth vs to returne into the Sheepe-fold of grace, if by errour we haue strayed from it, or by sinne, like lost sheepe. It is the end of all ends; the end of all consommation, and the extreamitie of extreamities, wither the wiseman doth send vs, if we desire to abstayne from sinning euerlastingly. For if death; if iudgement ensuing; if the terrours of Hell, serue for a bitt to the strongest mouth, and for a restraynte to the most desparate soule; what will it be if we add thervnto the importance of an Eternitie? If we consider the Blessed Eternitie, it is a Ionathas his
honie: if the Accursed, it is a Tobie's gale, soueraigne to cure the thickest and deepest blindnes. There is no Filme which falls not from the (...) washed with this water. No Torrent of sinne, which may not both be sustayned and repelled by this stronge banke. It is a Sunne which doth breake and disperse the cloudes of vice which striue to hide the light of grace. Lets approch then, Athanasia, to this Torch, and our darknes shall be blowen ouer. If we desire to be borne againe to Heauen, let vs, imitating that onely bird, consume our selues in the beames of that great starr. And if the thought of the worlds last day, Iudge of all the other dayes, filled S. Hieromes heart with such dread, that it made him loose both foode and repose, his sleepe being interrupted, by the terrible found of the Archangells trumpet, which sounded incessantly
in his imagination: what waight shall that eternall doome haue in our hearts, which shall crowne the iust with roses that cannot fade; and shall inuolue the wicked in quenchlesse flames, which being kindled with the blast of Gods wroth, shall co^tinue as long as the Deitie it selfe. No, I doe not beleeue, that all the Antidotes which Spiritualists prescribe against the poyson of sinne; that all their remedies put together in one masse, can haue the like effect, in the purging of a soule, that the importance of an Eternitie well pondered, can worke therin. O Lord thou hast giue^ a signe to those, who haue thy feare imprinted vpon their heartes, that they may auoyd the arrowes which thou shuttest from the bow of thy wroth; and that, by flight, they may free themselues from the eternall torments which doe attend them: torments
by which such onely are ouertaken, as for want of foresight and consideration, dread them not, as an auncient Father doth teach vs. O how happie is the soule, whose eyes God daynes to open, ouer so perilous a precipice, that therby she may auoyde it, and please our Lord in the Land of those that liue in his grace. For they that passe their dayes in this happie Abode, are not subiect to this seconde death, which hath no resurrection (for out of Hell there is no redemption, or escape) Their eyes owe no tributarie teares, since they are not afflicted with the torment of malice, nor doth their feete stumble in the way of saluation, which is that of the blessed Eternitie. Thinke of the last end, saith the wisest of men, and thou shal^ neuer offend. If then the thought o^ death, and of that which followe^ death, hath so much force in a soule
that is occupied in it, as to diuert it from all euil: what will it doe I pray you, in a well composed heart, which can iudiciously ponder the waight of things, when it shall come to thinke, that temporall death is but an instant which separates the soule from the body; and that the particular iudgement which doth immediately follow this separation, is past in a moment: marrie that the decree of this iudgement is of an eternall and vninterrupted continuance. Why, the threate of a temporall death, and the losse of a florishing estate, written vpon a wall by a celestiall hand, was able to seaze the soule of Baltazar with so daunting a terrour, that the scripture assures vs, that all his bones were thereby disioynted: so throughly did feare possesse both body and soule! How forceablely then shall the feare of an eternall death, worke
in a solide iudgement, and in a heart that thinkes seriously of its saluation. Will it not in this thought pronounce with the kingly Prophete: All my bones were troubled, that is to say, all my powres were disordered: and againe: All my bones shall say vnto thee, o eternall Lord, who is like vnto thee?


That this life is onely lent vs to thinke vpon Eternitie.
XX.
O Momentes of this mortall life, how carefully ought you to be managed, since by you, as by so many stepps, we mount to Eternitie! I, for God hath onely placed vs in this region of death, to breath continually to that of the liueing: nor are we in this Desert, for any other end, then to trauell to the Land of Promisse. Which shall one
day be distributed amongst vs, according to the line of distribution. The Angells at their first creation, were placed in a state of grace, and full freedome; and had a tyme to resolue their choyce of glorie or reprobation, by obedience, or reuoulting: and following their election, that great diuision was made, which doth eternally separate the Blessed, who kept their principalitie; from the accursed, who fell from Heauen into the Abisses below. Men, afterwardes created of so noble substances, to repaire the ruines of those that were fallen, haue also the tyme of their life to resolue and determine what shall become of them for all Eternitie. For which cause they were created straight and free; fire and water were put before them, that they might make election of which they liked. And they applie according to their owne will, the vse of their
freedome, nor are they to impute it to others then themselues, if by their owne malice misfortune befall them. He that shall sowe benedictions shall reape benedictions; but he that shall commit wickednes shall draw a curse vpon his owne heade, and that an eternall one, according as it is written: Goe you accursed into eternall fire. For at last, in the periode of our life, when as tyme shall be no more to vs, certaine it is that God will examen our workes, be they good or bad, and according to them, will reward each one. Then euery ones prayse or blame, shall proceede from the mouth of God. Now we are in the forked way of vertue or vice, which was shewen to the young Hercules, as an Auncient Authour writeth. It is in our power to take towards the right or left hand; and to sowe the seedes in this life, whose fruites we shall
gather in the next. Certes as the lines drawen from the Center of the earth, might goe to the circumfere^ce of the Heauens: so according to our comportment in these short momentes which we are to liue in earth, the definitiue Sentence of our eternall Abode, shall be giuen. It is our part therfore, tymely to thinke of our affaires, and to foresee what shall become of vs: for the scripture doth teach vs, that we shall reape according as we haue sowen. He that shall sow in spirit shall reape eternall life. The chaste Susanna being pinched with bitter perplexities, while those two infamous firebrands of dishonestie, threatned her the ruine of her reputation, vnlesse she condescended to their lewd desire, chowsed rather to fall innoce^t into the hands of men, then stayned into his, to whom nothing is hid, who tryes the hearts and reynes: and who can cast the
body and soule into eternall torments. Me thinkes sure each considerate heart, will take her part; and will pourchace at the price of transitorie and momentarie pleasures, endlesse paines. For tis a thinge too horrible to fall into the hands of the liueing God; the God of vengeance, terrible ouer all those of the earth. Contrariwise he will easely and willingly imbrace all kind of paynes and sufferances, who shall waigh as he ought, that is, in the waightes of the SANCTVARIE, these words of the sacred ORACLE That we are to enter into the Kingdome which knowes no end; to the reside^ce of Glorie, through many tribulations: since that our Sauiour Iesus Christ, was as it were forced to suffer, before he could enter into his eternall Felicitie, which he had wholy obtayned, and which, was necessarily due vnto him. The Parobolicall historie of
the wicked Rich-man, and the poore Lazarus, is a rich Table, representing this truth vnto our eyes set out in liuelie colours. Euerie one knowes the different successe of the one and the other; and what answere Father Abraham made to this miserable reprobate's complaintes. Call to mynd, Sonne, that thou tookest thy pleasures during thy life, and that Lazarus, suffered many afflictions. Now your estates are much changed: for he is replenished with ioy and delight; and thou oppressed with desperate greeues, and with punishments which shall neuer end. O double Eternitie! thou art like to those figues which were presented vnto the Prophete, wherof some were strangly bitter, the others extreamely sweete. The Blessed Eternitie is a LAND OF PROMISSE and rest, whose fruites are of an vnmeasurable greatnes, and incomparable sweetnes. The accursed,
is a forraine Region, full of disorder; a daunting desert, far remoued from the face of God: where the firie serpents doe stinge without cure, and kill without all hope of recouerie. O ETERNITIE! The more I consider thee, the lesse doe I know thee, and the deeper I endeauour to diue into thy bottome, more bottomelesse I find thee! Thou art the floode of the Prophete, which cannot be past, nether at the ford, nor otherwise. The Gyantes grone vnder thy waters, nor can any beaste, euen though it were an Elepha^t, passe ouer thee by swiming, to vse S. Gregories words. All that can be said of thee, is nothing in regard of that which should be said. Though a man speake all he is able, yet can he not sufficiently expresse thee, euen to represent the least stroke of thyne infinitie. Birdes, although they cannot soare to the
highest region of the aire, leaue not for all that to flie: And what if we cannot comprehend Eternitie; yet ought we not cease to speake what we conceaue of it, though we cannot conceaue, what we ought to speake therof. A man may enioy the light of the Sunne; walke in its resplendant rayes; and now and then steale a looke vpon it; though he be not able to haue his sight still fixed vpon its globe. We are to doe the like in this subiect of Eternitie: and be it, that our sight doth disperse and loose it selfe in the immensitie of its extent; yet are we from tyme to tyme to consider it, since life is ^ent vs for no other end, but to be spent, for the most part in this attention. This is that which the Prophete termes, couragiously to attend God, and with patience to supporte this attention. And the Apostle: To attend the blessed hope, of the coming
of the great God. I Lord, said the great S. Augustine, burne, cute, pinch, slice here below, so that I may not perish eternally.


An enterie to the consideration of the accursed Eternitie.
XXI.
BVt doe you not thinke it high tyme, Athanasia, that we should draw neerer by the consideration of both the Eternities, and that, for our spirituall profit we should make a kind of particular examen, and as it were, an Anatomie. We will begin at the accursed Eternitie, that we may follow the methode which the Spiritualistes obserue in the reformation of the soule, begining with feare, according to that of the wise man; the feare of our Lord is the begining of true wisdome. And is it not true wisdome
to thinke seriously and tymely of eternall saluation, and to direct our stepps towards the pathes of this peace, which passeth all vnderstanding, nor shall at any tyme be troubled with the noyse of warrs, but shall enioy with God, the abundance of a plentifull repose. I haue done Iudgement and Iustice, that is, I haue behaued my selfe iustly in all myne actions, saith the Royall Prophete. Will you haue the reason of this vprightnesse? because I haue dreaded the seueritie of the eternall Iudge. And another Prophete brings in Sinners conuerted to the father of mercyes, speaking in this wise. O Lord through thy feare we haue conceaued good pourposes, and by it, we haue at length produced and brought forth the spirit of saluation. The needle, following the Contemplatiues worne similitude, goes alwayes through before the silke; and sharpe
and pearceing FEARE (according to that word of Dauid: Lord pearce my body and soule with the FEARE of thy iudgements) is still the forerunner of ioy, ioy the inseparable fruite of the tree of true Charitie. I see then, that there I must begin: but a secrete horrour doth fasten vpon myne imagination, when I represent vnto my selfe so mournfull and daunting a matter. It is a far other thing the^ that place of horrour, and vaste solitude, wherof the Prophete speakes: for it is the verie herbour of eternall horrour, eternall reproach. It is the accursed denne, where DEATH doth eternally inhabite. What Memori^ hath not this remembrance in abomination? What Vnderstanding doth not flie a consideration so odious. What Will hath not an auersion from a subiect so distastefull? What Fantasie doth not turne it selfe from so sad an obiect? What Pen in lieu o^
writing would not fly away from a matter so much to be fled? What Inke blacke enough to equalise the blacknes of those coles of desolation? This notwithstanding, my Athanasia, the most holy and most wise, doe admonish and councell vs to thinke frequently of it, and to descende into Hell liueing, that we may not descend thither dying, saith a Father of the Church subtilly and truly. True it is, this medicine is bitter, and its bitternesse may cause a kind of drunkennesse, and distraction of mynd, marrie it is a wholsome distraction, and its conuulsions giues health and holinesse to the soule it doth seaze vpon. It is that volume of the Prophete's, bitter in the mouth, but restorature in the heart. What abundance of people fall into this gulfe, for want of forefeeing it. Let vs cast our selues into it by foresight, Athanasia, but as
Dyuers into the sea, to bring vp the pearles of good and holy resolutions.


The horrour of this subiect.
XXII.
IT is neuerthelesse very hard, that I may not say impossible, to be hold this subiect in the face without astonishment. For if the verie words, eternall Reprobation and Damnation, make the most constant and resolute courage quake; what will the consideration of their effect doe? A woman became once a Statua of salt vpon the aspect of an abominable towne burnt with heauenly fire, the inhabita^ts wherof descended into Hell aliue. I would to God that the sight of the accursed Eternitie would make vs as immoueable as Statua's to bad actions, and would Season vs with the salt of
true wisdome. Moyses had an horrour and an apprehension of his rodd, while departing out of his hand, he saw it tra^sformed into a serpent, and although God comma^ded him boldly to take hold of this beast by the tayle, yet durst he not doe it without trembling. O Athanasia, what heart is so resolute, as to behold the rodd of God, rodd of direction in his Kingdome, changed into a rodd of iron, driuing away the reprobate, as earthen potts, and in a rodd of furie, and not quake with a iust feare, sith that euen the heaue^ly. Intelligences, the celestiall Virtues assured of their saluation, shall be moued with feare, when the great Iudge shall come at the consommation of the world, to hold his last Assises. That which the Poetes fabulously relate of their Medusa, and of the Sunn's retrogradation least it might giue light to the horrid and
vnnaturall banquet of Thiestes, are but weake strokes of the sacred horrour, which the consideration of the cursed Eternitie doth imprint, vpon a soule. The reprobate to preuent the definitiue and irreuocable sentence of their eternall condemnation, shall one day inuoke the mountaignes to fall vpon them: and to burie them in an eternall obliuion. And if the heate of the Babilonian fornace did affright all the beholders with the firie flashes which it vomited out: what must the aspect of that eternall fornace (made hote with the wroth of God, and maintained in a continuall heate with a blast of brimstone), needes worke in a heart, that hath its sight sharpened by Faith?



It is an vniuersalitie of euils.
XXIII.
I Will discouer vnto thee all sortes of good, saith God to his fauorite Moyses, in manifesting my selfe vnto thee. Yes, for in the vision of God all felicitie is comprised, as also all sortes of euil in the priuation of this obiect of the soueraigne Beatitude. For if the supreme Felicitie, according to all the Diuines, be a perfect collection of all good; doth not the rule of Contraries oblige vs to beleeue, that the toppe of the soueraigne infelicitie is a collection of all euil. Goe to then, my Athanasia, let vs represent vnto our myndes all the calamities and torments imaginable and vnimaginable, and let vs loade the shouldiers of one onely with this heauie masse; and let vs affirme, that such is the least part of
the sufferances of the damned. In this world calamities are alwayes in a manner particular, so that it is an extraordinarie thing, to see the same partie assaulted with two or three at the same tyme: and when the defease is violent, it dures not; for that ether the desease ceaseth, or the patient opprest with it, ceaseth to bee. In Hell it is not so; for all the torments which we can co^prehend, yea euen those which are incomprehensible, meet in the same insta^^ vpon the damned's heade, vpon whom scourges are reunited, and ruine^ multiplied; euen as the Eagles, to make vse of the Scriptures comparison, and haulkes doe in troopes seaze vpon carrion. O God, said the good Iob, that man of greeues, and oppressed with infirmities and miseries, thou hast rowled vpon me all the billowes of thy wroth. And Dauid in a like aire, I am come to th^
brode sea, and the tempest hath swallowed me vp: how much better doe these words suite with the reprobate, who perceaue the heauie hand of the Diuine iustice vpon them, without all hope of solace? To them it belongs to reade in the booke of Lamentations, maledictions, and misfortunes, which the Prophete did sometymes write by Gods command to reclaime Israel from its vice and destruction: to them, I say, who are fallen to the bottome of all miseries. The great Angell of the Schowle, S. THOMAS, giuing a reason why all calamities conceauable doe fall vpon the damned, saith after S. BASILE, that in the end of the word, when fire shall generally purge it, there shall be a separation made of all pure and impure things in the elements, and as that which is pure shall be reserued for the pleasure and content of the
Elect; so that which is impure shall be cast into the Sinke or center of the earth, where the comon opinion placeth Hell, to be a continuall torment to the damned, being most iust, that as by their sinne they abused all creatures, so they all should conspire to torment them, as it is written in the booke of wisdome. That all the world shall fight for the seruice and glorie of the iustice of God, against the mad men. Propose vnto your selfe then, o Athanasia, a person reduced to that point of miserie, that at one instant he should be afflicted with all sortes of paines, not onely in the principall members, but euen in the least partes of his bodie, so far forth, that he should resent particular stingings through euery pore. Speake the truth, to behold the most vile and wretched creature on the earth in this dismale estate, would it not moue horrour in
your heart? And yet, Faith doth assure vs, that the torments of the damned are far other, and that all this collection of euils, is but a poore part of their cup. And Verily, most reasonable it is, that such as imployed all the powres of their body and soule to offend the soueraigne and eternall Goodnesse, should in euery of them be eternally punished by the Soueraigne Iustice. The numberlesse number of those paines are expressed in diuers passages of holy Scripture, where it speakes, of Fires, Ice, Darknes, Blindnes, Gnashings of teeth, Teares, Hungar, Thirst, Deseases, Swords, Howlings, Gale, Absinth, Prisons, Wormes, Serpents, Whirlewinds, Tempestes, Fournaces, Thunders, Wheeles, and a number of other scourges, wherof we find euery lease full.



The paynes of sense, and first of the sight and hearing.
XXIV.
ANd wheras generall discourses seeme not to be so efficacious as particular ones, let vs descend, Athanasia, from the generalitie of those eternall paines, to the particular consideration therof. The Contemplatiues diuide them into penas sensus, and penas damni, whence comes the word damnation, and it is incomparably greater then the former, though it far lesse strike vpon the imagination of vulgare myndes. The Sight, amongst the exteriour senses holds the first place, and the priuation therof, is numbred amongst the greatest miseries of this life, by the iust TOBIE a worthy witnesse of so troublesome a discommoditie. Now Faith doth
teach vs, that the damned shall be in thicker obscurities then those of Egipt, and that the te^pest of darknes shall possesse them for euer. And in the Holy Scripture Hell is marked out in these words, exteriour darknesse. For an Eternitie, saith the Prophete, light shall not be discouered therin; for although God be there, as it were in euery place; and that darknes cannot obscure his naturall light, yet his will is, that in this dry Lake, that is, voyd of all consolation, the darknesse couer the face of the Abisse; and that the eyes of the damned, though otherwise capable of sight, see nothing but that which may trouble and torment them. The fire of the diuine angar being once fallen downe vpon them, they shall neuer more discouer the Sunne, in punishme^t of the abuse of this noble sense in tyme past, and that in lieu of contemplating the Heauen, they
haue made their lookes dwell vpon the earth and creatures. And although light be as inseparable a qualitie of fire as heate; yet as of old when the three children were throwen into the fournace, the diuine powre leauing the light, did suspend the heate of the flame that it should not attempt vpon those innocents: so in Hell, he will permit the heates actiuitie vpon the reprobate, and yet will depriue the fire of light, to leaue them in obscuritie amongst the deade of ages, buried in an eternall obliuion, and far remoued from the light of his face. So shall our Lord diuide the flame from the fire, saith the Psalmist, that is according to some interpreters, he shall separate the light from the heate. And euen as during the palpable darknes, which God did of old spread ouer Egipt, while the Israelites enioyed a delightfull light,
the Idolaters were ether blind, or afflicted with frighting visions: so in Hell, amidst the pitchie blacknes of that region of the shadow of death, if at any tyme the da^ned enioy some obscure glimses, seeing as though they saw not, it shall be onely to espie the hideous shapes of amaysing fantomes, and horrible visions of Diuels, whose aspect shall be more insupportable vnto them, then the rest of their tortures. So that, if for the thicknes of this smoake, and the blacknesse of these obscurities, the priuation of the vse of this sense be an irkesome torment vnto them: the short vse, which at tymes they shall haue of it, will onely serue to add to their torment, alwayes vnfortunate both blind and seeing. I will omit the particular paines of this delicate part, which, as the Phisitians obserue, in its daintie litlenesse is obnoxious to so many different deseases,
which shall be yet diuersified both in qualitie and quantitie, according as the reprobate shall haue abused that noble Sense, which had bene in Heaue^ one of the principall organes by which the ioy of our Lord had entred into their heartes. O God with what frightes shall their soules be tortured by the sense of hearing, a sense, by so much more liuely and capable of paines, as it hath more commerce with the mynd. Ah! what a mad musike will there be heard, of howlings, scrikes, gnashings of teeth, and grones of desperation! If the thu^der clapp and trumpets sound, which did resound vpon the mountaine where God deliuered his law to MOYSES put all Israel in such an ALARVM, and struke the heartes of the people with such astonishment, that they said vnto their law giuer, Let not our Lord speake vnto vs least we should die.
What a death shall it be in death it selfe, to heare the voice of many waters, or rather the ouerflowing torrents of so many maledictions and horrible blasphemies, which rage and despaire shall draw from their execrable mouthes full of the stinch of a hellish brimstone. o how iarring the discorde, and how detestable the roarings of those victimes of the eternall furie! The eares of those eloquent Orators, and pleasing Poetes, who had taken so great complacence in the gratefull fall of their measured periodes, and in the sweete cade^ce of their rymes, shall find themselues at that tyme in a wonderfull disorder. The eares of those Princes which admitted onely silken words, and the oyle of sinners, that is, flatterie; who tooke content to be praysed in the desires of their heart, and blessed in their iniquities; who found no better musike then
that which their owne prayses made, as ALEXANDER said, who was as great in vanitie as valour, will then be struke with terrible accents. The eares of those Adonises (this word signifies Song) those Ninnions of the Goddesse Venus whose baites are dishonest songes. Those of these effeminate Musicia^s, and daintie Dames who must be lulled a sleepe by singing new aires, more pernicious then those of the Poetes Syrenes, shall then haue their eares filled with dreadfull plaintes, resembling the voice of the Storke or Dragon, to whom a Prophete compares his owne, while he lamented the incurable woundes of the people of Israel. But the damned shall be principally frighted, and shall quake to heare the thunder clape of the heauenly wroth, which shall continually resound in their eares. Wheras the iust, saith the
royall Prophete, shall be in the eternall memorie of God, and shall not feare the dreadfull crake of his wroth.


The paines of other two senses, the Smelling and tasteing.
XXV.
ANd if Hell be the world's sinke, and the Receptackle of all the filth of this great Frame, and with all a deepe du^geon, where the aire hath hardly any accesse; how great must the stinch and infection needes be, of so many corruptions heaped one vpon another, and how insufferable the smell of that infernall brimstone, mixed with so many corrupted matters? When we reade the sufferances of certaine Martires, who were afflicted with smells and vermine in darke prisons, we esteeme those lent martirdomes as painefull as the violent.
Nay some natures there be that can so litle support euil smells, that to enter into a Hospitall makes them swoone: And yet what is all this in comparison of the infamous exhalation of this gulfe of horrour of which we speake? Alas, Athanasia, LAZARVS his sisters though verie affectionate to their brother, could not endure that IESVS CHRIST should cause his graue to be opened, by reason of the stinch, which they apprehended would issue out of it, albeit he were but dead for the space of foure dayes. O infernall Caue without all vent or breathing hole; receptacle of filth and dunge; eternall graue of such as die continually and yet cannot die! with what abominable filth art thou not filled? you daintie offenders who liue onely amidst parfumes and Roses, who are dayly loaden with all the Parfumers drouges, then it is,
that in steede of sweete odours you shall rott in execrable smells, for punishment of that, that by your euil exemple, you were in your life tyme an odour of death to death, and not, an odour of life to life, and a good odour in IESVS CHRIST as pious people are. Then shall be said of you, that which a Prophete pronounced of Israel in Captiuitie; those that were clad in purple, and imbaulmed with parfumes, haue imbraced dunghills. With what afflictions shall not their taste be tormented. For besids the gale of dragons, wherof the scripture saith they shall drinke: and the bread of greife, which shall be their comon foode, a continuall hungar and thirst shall terribly tyrannise ouer them. They shall endure the hungar of mad-dogges, saith the Psalmist: And as touching the thirst which the burning heate of the reuengefull flame shall cause in
them, the storie of the wicked Richman doth furnish vs with an authenticall proofe. Iust iudgment of God vpon those who in their life tyme cramd themselues with the worlds fayding delightes, crowning themselues with roses, and spoyling all the floures of the meades of pleasures! All the most horrible famine that Scripture and histories propose vnto vs, are but weake pictures to that which the damned shall suffer in this vnfortunate Residence of eternall miseries.


The paine of the sense of touching.
XXVI.
THe sense of touching, the grossest of all the rest, yet the furthest extended, affording more hold to miserie, in my opinion, shall be more afflicted then the rest, and the subiect vpon which
the most cruell punishments shall be exercised. Yes, Athanasia, for all the torments which the Scripture doth propose vnto vs, as prepared for those which by the diuine Iustice shall be cast into the darke Dungeon of that eternall Gaole, seeme to fall vpon this onely sense. They shall passe saith IOB, from snowie waters, that is, from the extremitie of cold, to intollerable heates. Whole floodes of fire and brimstone shall shewre downe vpon those vnfortunate wretches, and againe, a part of their chalice shall be fire, hale, snow, ice, and the boysterous blast of tempestes. You see that all this belongs to the sense of touching. And indeede this eternall fire, whither the reprobate shall be condemned by the last sentence; and this Pond of fire and brimstone, whither they shall be cast headlo^g, shall worke principally vpon this
Sense. The hatchet is alreadie put to the roote of the tree, said the forerunner of Messias; and that which shall yeald no fruit shall be cut downe and cast into the fire. He hath alreadie taken the vanne into his hand, put into it the corne and chaffe, being resolued to separate them, and reserueing the one for his Granarie, to cast the other into a fire which shall neuer be quenched. And if amongst the torments which humaine Iustice hath inuented for the punishment of crimes, there is none held more rigorous then that of fire, by reason of the great actiuitie of this element: what shall the heate of that fire be, which shall be the executioner of the Iustice of the God of ve^geance, whose Zeale shall be inflamed against the wicked, and shall kindle the fire which shall eternally burne in the extremities of Hell, as MOYSES doth expresse it.
The Contemplatiues striue to persuade vs, that the materiall fire which we experience here below, is but as a painted fire, in respect of that, whose flame doth cause a horrible combustion, saith EZECHIEL, which shall neuer be extinguished. The Reprobate, saith S. IOHN, shall drinke the wine of Gods wroth, and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, and the smoake of his torment shall assend for euer and euer, that is, shall neuer end. And here it is, o my dearest soule, to purge thee from the rouste of thyne iniquities, and to make thee absolutely and for euer renounce sinne, an accursed cause of so horrible an effect, that I must brand thee with a wholsome marke, and make the descende in thought, into those disasterous flames, asking thee with the Prophete ISAYE, whether thou art able to liue in this deuoureing fire, and whether
thou wilt make choyce of thy habitation in eternall flames. I must vrge thee vpon this point, o my soule! and without vsing distinctions or euasions, without all exceptions, thou must answere my demand. This fire is prepared for the Diuel and his reuoulted Angells, saith the holy Euangilist, consider, whether thou will enter into this accursed crue, and take part of the dreggs of their chalice. There is noe meane, either must sinne be forsaken, or thou thy selfe be giuen vp a prey to this eternall torment. It is long since this sentence was pronounced, which teacheth vs, that we are either to doe penna^ce in this life, or eternally to burne in the next. To auoyde these straytes and slipe away to the right or left hand, is impossible; Heauen and earth shall passe, but the words of truth shall neuer passe. If thou be not altogether blind, and if the
light of reason be yet with thee, I doubt not but thou wilt make a happie choyce, and to escape so dangerous a gulfe, thou wilt cast thy selfe into the armes of grace, and Diuine mercy, which admites onely the penitent, and repentant prodigalls: goe then, my deare soule, vpon this thy holy resolution, and begge of the Diuine clemencie, that he would finishe his worke in thee, and that he would bestow grace vpon thee, to accomplish that, which it hath made thee will, and begin. For vnlesse God build, in vaine doth a man goe about to build; and all that is not established vpon the fundation of his assistance, cannot choose but be ruinous.



A sith to God.
XXVII.
O Great God who art a consuming fire, whose words are fire and as a hammer brusing the hardest stones. Who appeares in the burning bush, when thou wilt giue a law of terrour and dreade vnto the world; and sends that of loue in firie tongues, whose Zeale is as burning as fire, and whose lampes are fire and flames, whose iealousie is strong as death, and hard as Hell. Who makes the fire of thy Diuine Iustice issue from amo^gst the thornes, to destroy the tallest Cedars of Libanus, who kindlest the reprobate as coles with the fire which proceedes from thyne irritated face. Who continues the furnace where they are plunged, in its wounted heate, by the torrent of burning brimstone which flowes from
the face of thy iust indignation. O God of reuenge, let this thought make so liuely an impression in our ^magination, that we may be therby roused out of the lethargie of pleasures, concupiscence, and wordly ambition which keepe vs asleepe. Let the fire, which walkes before thee as executioner of thy terrible Iustice, and which doth consume thyne enemyes, to witt the reprobate, neuer depart from our memorie; may it be vnto vs a torch, and pillar of light, in the darknesse of the world and our errours; a Lampe to our feete, and a light to our wayes wherby we may discouer the gulfe which will swallow vs vp, vnlesse we prohibite the feete of our affections, to follow wicked wayes, and command them to walke in the wayes of thy law. Thou o Lord, who didst deliuer the three children out of the Babilonian furnace (a figure of that wherin the
reprobate burne for euer) preserue vs from those abominable flames, where thou art continually blasphemed; and exempting vs from the sharpe and burning ones of thy wroth, place vs in the light and bright ones of thy loue, where like Pyralides, and sacred Salemanders, we shall liue happie, without paine, or consummation, singing honour praise, and benediction vnto thee for the Canticle of our deliuerance.


Of interiour paines.
XXVIII.
LEt vs now come, Athanasia; to the consideration of interiour paines. And let vs iudge of the torments of the soule, as well by the aduantages which it hath ouer the bodie, as by the large share it hath in the malice of sinne, which is consummated in the will. If a
Stoicall philosopher had light enough to discerne, that euery disordered mynd is its owne Torme^ter: what a torture shall the reprobate find in their owne hearts, in this accursed place of disorder, which is replenished with the horrour of an eternall confusion? There their vnderstanding shall be darkned with cloudes: because they shall be ouertaken with a night of obscuritie, and be couered with the thicke shades of death. I will omitt the subtile schowle questions, whether they shall be intangled in errours and ignorances, wherof those accursed inhabita^ts of that black prison seeme to complaine in the booke of wisdome, when they say, that the Sunne of vnderstanding doth not enlighten them. Vpon this subiect I will onely stike to that vndoubled truth, which teacheth vs, that they are fallen for euer into a reprobate sense,
which causeth their will (still following that which the vnderstanding proposeth vnto it) being bent to vice like a crooked bowe, as the Psalmist tearmes it, to hate God with an implacable and extreame hatred. But if some subtile disputant goe about to teach vs, that since the will cannot hate Good which is its proper obiect, it is impossible that it should co^ceaue a true hatred against God, who is the soueraigne good: we will answere him with the Angelicall S. THOMAS, that the damned doe not hate God in himselfe, because they know him not such as he is, (as doe the Blessed who by reason of that knowledge cannot leaue to loue him) but onely in his workes: for the vnderstanding of the damned conceauing God as Authour of the torments they endure, causeth their will to be incensed against him with a mortall and raging hatred: And
wheras, nor God, nor the payne, which they suffer can cease to bee, their courrage ceaseth not, and their will is continually tortured with this vnsufferable auersion. Their memorie also shall haue its peculiar torme^t: for if the blessed in Heauen reioyce in the labours and reproaches, which they endured for the loue of God, and that through the fire and water of tribulations they are entred into rest: the memorie of pleasures past shall be an extreame torment to the reprobate, when they call to mynd, that for those transitorie moments they are fallen into pinching and endlesse paines. They shall roare out with ESAV to haue sold their heauenly inheritance for a mease of potage. For comparing in their mynd pleasures past with those that are eternall, and apprehending the approach of torments whose cruell panges they feele, will not
this memorie, thinke you, draw vpon them an insupportable affliction? With what Phantomes and monsterous imaginations shall their fantisie be tortured? Frame a iudgement of it, by that which happens to such as in this life, finding themselues guiltie of greeuious crimes, feare to fall into temporall Iustice. They may indeede sometymes be in a secure place, but neuer in securitie. They may be hid from the eyes of men, and be placed out of their reach; but neuer shall they be able to hide themselues from themselues, or escape the assault of their owne conscience. While they wake they are vexed with feares and suspicions: their sleepe is interrupted with wicked dreames, dreade doth still haunt them: at each ones approach they quake with feare, and the Furies hauing seased vpo^ them, grant them nether Peace nor Truce:
their dissipated thoughts put their hearts vpon the Racke. Now if the apprehension of humane Iustice, which hath power onely ouer the bodie, giue so daunting Alarumes to the imagination; what will the sense of the dartes of the Diuine Iustice doe, which are so many vessells of death and burning arrowes shot at the damned soule? But who can expresse the strange Chaos, and horrible confusion which shall inhabite the inferiour appetite of the lost crue? For if all the disorder of mans life spring from his passions, which as blustering blastes are shut vp in the two caues Concupiscible, and irascible: what disorder, iudge you, must those wretched soules needs feele in that part, what contradictions in themselues, what conuulsions, what rage, what furie? Alas that noble passion, LOVE, Queene of all the rest, the Sunne and salt of life, that
passion which might haue made them happie for euer, if they had turned it towards God, that soueraignely amiable obiect, being as it were razed out of them, the perpetuall auersion they haue to loue, shall afflict them as the panges of a woman in childbirth, who cannot yet be deliuered. S. CATHERINE OF SIENNA being vpon a day present while a possessed person was exorcised, the Diuel being commanded to declare his name, he answered with a hideous how leing; I am the accursed DEPRIVED-OF-LOVE. At which the Sainte was so moued, that she thought she should haue fallen downe in a Traunce. Touching the passion of hatred, it shall be outragious in the da^ned, whence shall proceede their continuall blasphemies against God, and the perpetuall maledictions and imprecations which they shall make against
the creatures. And if they haue any Desires, they shall be execrable ones, to see all the world partakers of their paynes: not that they are at all solaced therby, but onely to giue way to the incredible malice, of which they are full. Their auersion from all good shall be as much tormenting, as in it selfe it is execrable. Of Ioy, there must no mention be made in that place of dolour: But co^trarwise of an incredible Sadnesse, which shall oppresse them without all consolation. The heate of Anger shall redouble the heate of their flammes. Hope banished from their hearts, shall leaue the place voyde to Despaire, which shall be one of their greatest and fiercest Tormentors. And beit that an impudent and shamelesse audacitie shall ope^ their blaspheming and stinking mouth against Heauen, yet shall an eternall horrour make them quake, though
indeed nothing can befall them, worse then that which they alreadie endure. Thus shall they be tossed with the blast of those tempestuous winds, being burde^some and insupportable to them selues. And though their bodie be within Hells bosome, yet shall they beare about with them another Hell in their owne bosomes. They shall vomite out venimous words against themselues being weather-beaten by their passions, as with contrarie winds vpon the sea of so many calamities. They shall be deuoured with the sharpest gnawing of the bloodie birds of their inordinate affections. They shall be giuen vp in prey to their owne rage, as the Poetes Acteon to his owne hounds.



The Prison of Hell.
XXIX.
ANd if libertie be reputed so great a good, that all the goods of life, yea life it selfe, without it, are esteemed as nothing, whence it is, that amongst the ioyes of the blessed, the libertie of the children of God is placed. What conceipt are we to make, my Athanasia, of the eternall captiuitie of the damned, in a prison so horrible as that of Hell? O Lord how true it is, that he that sinneth, adiudgeth himselfe to a perpetuall slauerie: but a slauerie farr other then that which Israel suffered in Egipt, where the Diuells are farr more cruell then Pharaos officers, who put the Hebrewes to digge and delue the earth. A prison, saith S. CIRILLE, all on a fire, and where the darknesse
shall neuer be enlightned with any ray of light; where pestilent and gnawing wormes liue in spight of death. Who would not feare, saith S. BERNARD, this worme that cannot die, this place full of fire, this smoake, this stinking brimstone, those blasts of tempests, those thicke and blacke fogges of exteriour darknesse? For what light, I pray you, can penetrate into the bowells of the earth, whither euerie liuing creature descended, of those that reuoulted from MOYSES, as the Psalmist teacheth vs, and as we gather out of the booke of Numbers. For to doubt whether Hell be in the Center of the earth, a place furthest remote from the glorie of the blessed, seemes to me a thing impossible, after one haue well waighed the places of Scripture, and of Fathers, pointing out this truth. ISAY, speaking of the descent of Messias into Hell, Hell which is below the
earth, saith he, was troubled in thy arriuall. And the same Messias is made speake in this sort by Ecclesiasticus: I will penetrate the inferiour parts of the earth, and I will visite all those that sleepe therin. And the verie Diuels in S. LVKE besought our Sauiour, that casting them out of the bodies which they possessed, he would not send them into the Abisse. S. CIRILLVS ALEXANDRINVS speaking of Hell, tearmes it a blacke Caue vnder grou^d, replenisht with darknesse, smoake, and all miseries, where the damned soules are as in a dungeon. TERTVLIAN calls it a Treasure of fire shut vp vnder the earth. And S. AVGVSTINE teacheth in diuers passages, that Hell is vnder the earth; as also S. GREGORIE the Great. There is the lake, or rather the cisterne without water of co^solation, whither those vnfortunate soules are banished. A prison far other then that
which was so irksome to IOSEPH, since that those accursed soules are there bound hand and foote, afflicted with ineffable torments. And which is yet worse, without all hope of deliuerie. To which if we adde the compaignie of Diuells, whose complices they made themselues, by reuoulting, with them, from their Creatour, I doe not thinke, that any thing more horrible can be conceaued. Alas the stateliest house in the world, being designed to any one for his prison, appeares forthwith to him gracelesse and disagreable, so powrefully doth loue of libertie possesse mens mynds! what will that house be wher all imaginable and vnimaginable euils make their generall Assemblie, following the conceit of the great Romane Muse?



Of the paine of Damni.
XXX.
BVt amongst all those euils, Diuinitie teacheth vs, that none is comparable to that which is called the paine of damni, whence damnation, and the damned take their names. No, not all the exteriour ones, nor yet all the interiour ones, which breefly we haue represented, can any way enter into comparison with this, which alone, doth further surpasse them all in greatnesse, the^ the highest celestiall spheere, doth surmount this earthly globe. Which I will endeauour, to make you vnderstand, Athanasia, by this consideration. In sinne there are two principale malices, the first, is the auersion fro^ the Creatour; the other, is the conuersion to the Creature: which God declares by the
mouth of his Prophete in these words: my people at once committ two euills, they forsake me, who an the fountaine of liue-water, and they make vnto them selues broken Cisternes which can hold no water. To this second malice, belongs that paine of Sense, whose miseries we expressed in the precedant stroke: but to the abandonning of the Creatour, appertaines the paine of damni, which consists in the eternall priuation of the sight of God, wherin is placed the highest point of the immortall beatitude. Now, I apprehend, saith the Father with the golden mouth, that part of glorie incomparably more great then all the other torments. And the same addes, that tenne thousand torments like to those of the damned are nothing being co^pared to this priuation. Wherin this Doctor is followed of all the rest, and the schoole doth teach it as a constant truth, which cannot be
called in doubt, without shaking the grounds, and violating the principles of Christianitie. S. THOMAS strikes further into it: for though the paine of damni be equall in all the da^ned, and that of sense vnequall, according to that which is written, that the torments are proportioned to the vnlawfull delights: and although as well those of sense, as of damni, be equall in respect of the Eternitie of their durance; yet doth he hold, that the paine of sense, and that of damni, doe differ almost as much as a finite and infinite thinge: for certaine it is, that touching the senses, the punishment of the reprobate comes far short of their demerits, the Diuine goodnesse not being able to conteyne his mercy, euen in the effects of his greatest wroth: but as for the losse of an infinite good, wher in the paine of damni doth consiste, who sees not, that this punishment is in some sort infinite?
And if insensible thinges find no rest till they be reunited vnto their Center, since they were not separated from it but by violence; how intolerable must the state needs be which doth separate a soule for euer from its true principle, which is God, without all hope of returne. O rebellious Absalomes! for an Eternitie you shall be banished from the Court of this heauenly Father, who doth no longer accnowledge you for his children! Prodigalls that you are, who by your reuoults and deboistnesse haue dissipated the substa^ces of this eternall Fathers grace: then shall there be no more tyme of repentance left for you: and in this perpetuall separation from his face, you shall remayne for an Eternitie in that forraine land couered with the shadow of death, because you did wilfully separate your selues from the Authour of life. God will
reiect you eternally, eternally shall you be depriued of the light of his countenance and of the light of that glorie, which is the part and portion of the Blessed. For euer shall you lament the losse of this priselesse treasure; as Michol spe^t teares, and could not be comforted for the losse of her Gods. You shall sob, but in vaine, in vaine shall you moane the losse of the God of Gods, whose deare presence had as throughly replenished you with happinesse, as his absence doth oppresse you with disaster.


The continuall greife.
XXXI.
THe geife of this so irreparable a losse shall be so bitter in those wretches, that we may count it, Athanasia, for one of their greatest torments. For when they begin once to consider what
they are, and what they might haue bene; and for what dolours they haue changed the inconceaueable felicities, which were prepared for them in the sight of God; the fruitlesse repentance of their follie, will so vexe them, that thence shall spring those teares, those gnashings of teeth, and those groanings, which the scriptures doe allote the^. Thence that immortall worme, which incessantly shall gnaw them, mentioned by ISAY, a worme which S. THOMAS, and all the Doctors hold to be spirituall, not corporall, and that it consisteth onely in a perpetuall repentance, and remorse of co^science, which shall sting them, no otherwise then wormes are wont to gnaw the bodies in which they are bred and fedd. For this greife rysing from the remembrance of their sinne which is the cause of all their euils, and of so deplorable a priuation of the sight
of God, shall liue co^tinually in their memorie, and shall cause a sharper remorse in them then all their other tortures. When they shall call to mynd so many secreete inspirations, so many exteriour exhortations, so many interiour motions, which they had felt, to reclayme them from their wicked wayes; when they shall reflect vpon tyme mispent and lost, which they might haue made vse of for their conuersion, and for the redeeming of their vnfortunately spent dayes. When they shall represent vnto their thoughts, how often they were warned to forsake the wayes of sinners, and not to sitt in the chaire of pestilence, to which they turnd a deafe eare and would not vnderstand welldoing. And when they shall come to contemplate the vnfortunate estate, to which the contempt of so many remonstrances shall haue reduced them, together
with their neglige^ce in not making vse of occasions past, which will neuer more present themselues vnto them: o God! with how fruitlesse an abomination of their crimes, and with how furious and mad an indignation shall they be transported? But lets rather heare them in their owne words, expresst by the holy Ghost in the booke of wisdome, where he brings them in, speaking in this sort. We haue strayed and wandred from the wayes of truth, nor haue we bene enlightened with the light of Iustice. The Sunne of vnderstanding hath not cast his beames vpon vs, where you are to note by the way, that these children of the Diuell speake thus, following their Father's spirit, which is the spirit of Lies, since sufficient grace to be saued, and necessarie light to descerne what is good, is denyed no man, God desiring that all should be saued, and
should come to the knowledge of truth. But let vs heare the continuation of those vniuste plaintes. We gaue our selues ouer to the wayes of iniquitie, and to the pathes of our ruine; we haue wandered in painefull wayes, being ignorant of the pathes of our Lord. Here you see how they mixe cokle with the good corne, wheate with Chaffe, I meane, they mixe truth with falsities, putting darknesse for light: For true it is, the way of vice is painefull and loathsome, and to speake with the Prophete, it is besett with thornes: but it is most false to affirme, that they knew not the Diuine pleasure, since the light of nature, and the light of Faith, MOYSES and the Prophetes doe more then sufficiently point it out; wherin they offend doublely in seeking to excuse their sinnes, and become so much more lyable to punishment, that hauing knowen the will of
their great maister they did it not. Let vs closely follow the grones of the reprobate, and see how the Racke compells them at length to confesse the truth: what hath pride profited vs; what aduantage haue we gotten by the vanitie of riches? all that, is past as a shadow; as a Poste, that rides at full speede; as a shippe sayling on the sea vnder full sayles, leauing behind her no markes of her passage: as a bird swinning in the ayre, whose trace is not found; as an arrow which flying cutts the ayre, and the ayre presently reunites it selfe. So haue our dayes run by, without leauing any marke of vertue: we haue spent in malice, all the Tyme which was liberally bestowed vpon vs, to worke our saluation, in feare and trembling. We haue past the course of our age in apparences, and in the vanities and false follies of the world, and in an instant we are fallen into Hell. In this sort, doe those wretches gnawen
with a continuall sorrow, vnprofitably repent them selues, and grone vnder the pressure and affliction of heart, which is the Hell of their Hell. How did the Egiptians, thinke you, greeue, who contemned IOSEPHES counsell to make their prouision of corne, during the seaue^ yeares of plentie, which were so abundant, that wheate was no more esteemed then sand, while, during those others of famine, they were constrayned to giue the most precious things they had, yea euen their ^owne libertie, least famine might driue their soules out of their bodies. What a liuely sense of greife shall they be touched withall, while they shall consider, that their former abundance caused in them many offences; and that their present want is the punishment of the same offences: but especially when they shall see PHARAO made Maister
of all their goodes, as well moueable as immoueable, and that of his simple subiectes, they are become his slaues. O how heartily they would haue wished that they had giuen credit to the good IOSEPHES prophicies, who aduised them to be myndfull in their plentie, of the hard tyme to come, and to make good prouision in tyme of harnest, while their granaries and Cellers ouerflowed on euery side. But how light is this temporall miserie if it be compared to the eternall sorrow which shall torment the reprobate, aduertised by so many remonstrances as well by writing as by word of mouth, which bett vpon their eyes and eares, and made them inexcusable, in not hauing redeemed lost tyme; and in hauing, by the hardnesse and inpenitence of their heart, heaped vp a treasure of anger, in the day of our Lords anger. What a
remorse shall they feele, to see that their wounds waxe old in the face of their imprudence. And that while they might haue purchased an eternall and priselesse felicitie for a glasse of cold water giuen in the loue, and for the loue of God; yea haue borne away the crowne of glorie, by naturall and necessarie actions being done in grace with conformitie to Gods will (at so easie a rate doth the supreame Goodnesse sell heauen!) and that these truthes were so frequently proposed vnto them by the Ghospell, and the preachers therof, who as trumpets made them resound in their eares, they not being moued with all this, lesse sensible then the walls of Hierico, who fell at the sound of the prestly trumpett. What a heart-breake it shall be vnto them to thinke how litle they inioyed, and for how litle a space they possessed the same:
what benefits they haue lost; from how faire adua^tages they are fallen: how litle was demanded at their hands, for a priselesse glorie: together with the torments passing conceit, which they shall endure without all hope of end. To speake the truth, as there is no head so strong that turnes not, nor body so stiddie that shakes not, at the aspect of a deepe descent; so me thinkes, there is no braine that is not troubled, by bending its atte^tion towards the eternall sorrow, which shall incessantly gnaw vpon those miserable catiues.


The Eternitie of the torments of Hell.
XXXII.
BVt when all is done, Athanasia, reason must render the Ghost, and humane wisdome
must be drunk vp in the consideration of the Eternitie of those paines, which we haue set out in weake colours: For if those torments, how euer great, how euer long, were to haue end, yet hope would in habite the bottome of Pandoras bote, nor should this hope be voyd of some sparke of consolation. But alas! in saying neuer, we say a terme without terme, and which, for the tyme to come, shall continue as long as God shall be God. The Reprobate, saith the sacred texte, shall be forsaken of God eternally. Eternally shall God be angrie with them, and that without reconcilement. This Abisse neuer renders any thing it once swallowes vp, the soules that are once cast headlong thither, neuer returne. Out of that Gaole there is no redemption. There, no thoughts of God, but such as are blasphemous; no praise is rendred him in that accursed
dungeon. The flame of the Babilonian furnace burnt 49. handfulls high, but could neuer rayse it selfe to the fiftith, a number of IOVBILIE and Pardon, as figure of that wherof we speake, where there is no remission of sinnes. There, saith the Psalmist, are the damned deuoured of death, no otherwise then sheepe doe grase: for as the grasse putts vp againe vnder the sheepes nibling tooth, so shall the reprobate be continually struke with the sting of a liuing death, and still as they shall be deuoured by it, they shall reuiue to new punishments, wherin the truth of that shall be seene, which the Poetes did onely fabulously relate of the liuer still renewed, as by the vultour it was deuoured. The wicked, saith the holy Ghospell, shall be cast into the fire, and they burne, in steed of saying they shall burne. A wonderfull speech,
which by a present tense, in lieu of a future, doth represent the Eternitie of this endlesse torment. For after a thousand ages, and as many millio^s, as ce^tenaries of million of millions, one may still affirme of these accursed soules, they burne: while incessantly they pay the reuenew of a rent, whose principale they shall neuer extinguish. No, for Eternitie being, a perpetuall To-day, and a continuance remayning still in the same beeing; how can that run by, which stands still in the same state? And if there be any thing new, it shall be the Canticles of ioy, which shall continually be new in the blissed Eternitie: In the accursed, the reprobate shall suffer, and dayly shall attend new sufferances, and their sense still liuely, shall neuer be hardened therby. Their being accustomed to endure, shall not make their torme^t lighter, or lesse insupportable. Whateuer
euer calamities we suffer in this life, be they neuer so great and greuious, they dure onely for a tyme, saith the Prophete DANIEL, but to the damned, tyme shall not be. Lets call to mynd, saith S. PACION, that in Hell there is no place left for repentance. For the tyme therof is past. Happie is he who by a good confession foreruns the face of the Iudge iustly irritated with our crymes: who doth promptly performe all the good in this world, which his hand is able to worke. And who doth well in euery thing, while in this life precious tyme is lent him. For now it is the houre to rise from the sleepe of the death of sinne: for our saluation or da^nation are neerer then we beleeue. But, will it please you Athanasia, that to giue life to this Draught we may borrow from this subiect of the Eternitie of those paynes, the colours of some excellent
pincell of antiquitie. Heare S. AVGVSTINE then, or rather see how he setts out this eternall miserie in its colours. As for the accursed soules, saith he, their death, is without death; their end without end; their tearme, without tearme. For their death shall be still liuing; their end shall still be begining; and their tearme shall neuer expire. Death shall stifle without killing them. The Torture shall bruse without distroying them. The flame shall burne them, without affording light at all; for this fire shall be darke; and horrour shall inhabit this darknesse; and darknesse shall increase the torment of the flame. Thus shall they be sett vpon with the sense of dolour and horrour; incessantly suffering and dreading. S. GREGORIE the GREAT, almost in the same aire, giues vs assurance of the Eternitie of paines. In this torture of the reprobate, saith he, death is immortall, and end endlesse. Because death liues there continually,
and continually the end begins anew. Where be now, saith S. BERNARD, the children of the flesh, the louers of the world, whose conuersation in earth, was amongst vanities and delightes; what haue we left of them but corruption, and a most distastefull memorie? They had a life of it in the earth, they eate and drunke delicately, they liued at their ease, and in an instante they descended into Hell. Their flesh in earth serues onely now for wormes-meate; and their soule burnes in eternall flames. For what did their glorie and vanitie serue them, what benefit did they reape of their transitorie ioyes? what aduantage did their great powre bringe them? say, what hath their foule pleasures, and abundance of wealth left them? To what a low ebbe is their soaring ambition reduced! Alas the extreamitie of their ioyes was followed with teares and gnashings of teeth,
which shall neuer haue end: and out of their short delightes, they are falle^ into torme^ts, rigourous beyond measure, and long without end. From the mouth of these two or three reprochlesse witnesses, let vs draw this word of Truth, that the vndoubted Eternitie of these paynes of Hell, puts vpon them the seale or marke of Infinitie, since one shall neuer see an end of their continuance, or of their intiere consummation. If I tooke as much content in filling pages, as I precisely studie breuitie, I might haue here a large feilde, by giuinge my imagination leaue to run, in those vulgaire similitudes, or conceipts, which giue to weaker witts slender Idea's of Eternitie, so far forth as man's vnderstanding can reach. But I omitt the litle immortall bird drawing dry the Ocean, by drawing thence euery hundred thousand yeares one drope
of water. I leaue the number of the starrs, of the leeues of trees, the sands of the sea, and all the Arithmetique of the most skilfull maisters at the end of its lyne, and other the like conceipts, which I blame not, for the respect I beare to the great and deuoute personnages, who did apprehend them fitting, good and fruitfull, not onely for the comon, but most aduanced soules. I will passe, I say, these thoughtes, leauing them to each ones inuention, as their gust or spirituall profit shall moue them. For my part, Athanasia, I confesse vnto you simply and sincerely the hardnesse of my owne hart, wherin they made but a weake impression.



Of the desperation of the damned.
XXXIII.
BVt in recompence hereof, I was wonderfully moued with the consideration of the furious and inconceaueable despaire, which the Sight of this horrible Eternitie of paines shall cause in the hartes of the damned. And truly, as the worme which eates the aple, is bred in the selfe same fruite, so shall this eternall despaire, like to a gnawing worme, issue out of the selfe same Eternitie whence it doth springe. True it is that the torments which the damned shall suffer in all the members of their body, and in all the faculties of their soule, are extreame. Yet the consideration that they shall neuer haue end, adds another extreamitie to this extreamitie, which passeth imagination, and
which will incite these accursed wretches, fallen into a reprobate sense, to open their mouth against Heaue^, and to horrible blasphemies against God, as much, or more, then the sense of their punishments? And if the Prophete said, that he would cry like a dragon, and grone like an o^trige, ouer the desperate and incurable wounds of Israel, how much more terrible shall the how lings of the reprobate be, animated with a spirit of despaire and rage, in seeing their calamities voyde of all hope of redresse? So that it is the opinion of ALBERT THE GREAT, and DENIS THE CARTHVSIAN, that this thought of Eternitie, shall much more afflict them, then all the paines of their tortures. Which the great S. AVGVSTINE expresseth in these termes. Being tormented without interruption or end, they shall liue depriued of all hope of pardon, all
expectation of mercy, wherin doth consiste the greatest of their calamities. For if they could but hope that their torments would haue end, after so many millions of yeares as all the creatures, euen to the worlds end, shall haue had haires on their head, be this number as great and incredible as it will, yet is it finite, and this imaginatio^ of an end would in some sort solace their sufferances. But wheras there is no end proposed vnto them, they giue themselues ouer to despaire, and impatie^ce doth double their paines. This moued the Prophete to say that their worme shall not die, and their fire shall neuer be extinguished, neuer be consumed, because this worme of despaire shall torture their vnderstandings, while the flame burns their body: being most reasonable, that those who with body and soule offended an eternall God, should be
punished in body and soule, and be adiudged vnto paines that should last as long, as God should be God, that is for euer.


Paines without intermission.
XXXIV.
THis so dreadfull despaire, shall yet be augmented, Athanasia, by a consideration which I find, no lesse singular, then remarkable: to wit, that those paines shall not onely be eternall, but also without intermission. For the da^ned shall not onely passe in an instant, from one extreamitie to another, and as IOB saith, from frosen waters, to deuouring fires, but their torme^ts shall be continuall, and continually in a point vnsufferable, and without intermission at all. No part of repose, or abatement of paines are there to be hoped. T'is a warre that
shall neuer haue truce. In the sufferances of this life, be they neuer so great, there is alwayes some moderation or place to breath in; in that they stay not still in the same state. As the heaue^s doe incessantly rowle: So all that is vnder those rowleing spheeres, are obnoxious to changes and reuolutions. The seasons doe continually change, and continually renew the face of the vniuers. The Moone increaseth and decreaseth. The Sunne doth aduance it selfe, or put it selfe in a greater distance from vs. The sea hath its ebb and flowing: and the springs, riuers, and floods, run day and night to find the Sea. Man's age runs dayly to decay. Kingdomes and Empires, haue their tymes to florish and fade. Deseases are lightned, in that they come but by fits, and by the hope we haue to end, or mend. In aduerse fortune we are comforted, by expectation to
find her fauorable. The sharpest and most violent sicknesse, hath its interualls, and qualifications. Sleepe is the comon charme of greeues, and often by its dreames, it rayseth the condition of the most miserable (for the space it continewes), aboue the happines of the most happie. But in Hell, sleepe flyes from the ey-lids of the reprobate, nor doth rest, seiourne neere vnto them. Their teares doe neuer dry vp: their Ague is continuall, and without intermission. Without relaxatio^ they dy in liuing; without relaxation, they liue in dying. And if a rayne continuing for 40. dayes onely, was able to drowne the whole world: o God what a Deluge of miseries shall choke those miserable soules, vpon whom, without release, floods of fire, and darts of furie and malediction, shall showre downe. And if things most aggreeable, turne disagreeable
by co^tinuance; in so much that the Manna, a food no lesse delicious then miraculous, became lothsome to the Israelites; And if eating euery day the same dish, makes vs loath the most toothsome and exquisite bit: if wayes that ly through great plaines, though otherwise faire and facile, seeme tedious: And if none would purchace the possession of a crowne, vpon condition, to ly without sturring in a most delicate, and richly parfumed bed for the space of thirtie or fortie yeares. What shall it be I pray you, continually to ly extended, vpon inconceaueably hote burning coales, and amongst execrable stinches, and all the torments that can be imagined, without repose, without intermission, without co^fort, without hope, and without release, for a whole Eternitie, O you that are deafe, saith ISAYE, harke; o you blind, behold!
But who is blind, but he that is slaue to sinne; who is deafe but he that is made slaue to his vices? And thou who seest so many things, seest thou not this? And thou that hast thyne eares open, hearest thou not this? But alas how many are there in the world, who haue eyes, but not to see, and eares but not to vnderstand truthes so manifest? O Lord, thou who dost euery thing so well, who makest the blind see, and the deafe heare: open the eyes, and eares of those, whom the vanities and filth of the world doe make blind and deafe; To thend that those that doe run to their ruine, and doe precipitate themselues into horrible misfortunes for want of foreseeing the^, may by the feare of thy iudgments reclaime their footsteps from those so slipperie wayes. O God who is able to relate the powre of thy wroth, and to know, without amaysement,
the effectes of thyne indignation? o how horrible a thing it is to fall into the hands of the liuing God! hands so heauie, that IOB being onely touched with the tippe of one of the fingars therof, and that for a smale space too, inuites all creatures to take pittie of him; o how burdensome and insuportable are they to the reprobate!


Whether it were better for the damned not to bee.
XXXV.
FOrme a iudgment of it out of this consideration, Athanasia, that without respite they search after death and it comes not; they shall wish for it, and it shall fly from them. Vpo^ which the Deuines moue a fine questio^; to witt, whether it were not better for the damned to bee no more, or neuer to haue bene
at all, then to subsiste without anihilation amidst so many liuing deathes. To which the Angell of the schowle, S. THOMAS, makes answeare with no lesse subtilitie then soliditie, that the non-esse being considered purely in it selfe, is the euil of euils, and the most miserable condition imaginable, and that thus, it cannot in generall be desired. But being taken as deliuering vs, from a beeing accompained with all sorts of miseries; and as it is a priuation of so many calamities, it may be wished for of those who are in so deplorable a state. Whence it is said in the Ghospell of that reprobate which betrayed the sonne of man, and who through despaire hanging himselfe was burst in the midst. It had bene better for this man that he had neuer bene. And IOB in the extreamitie of his afflictions curseing the day of his birth, wished that he had neuer bone.
S. AVGVSTINE confirmes this opinion when he saith: The wicked and impious persons that are plunged in eternall fires, shall liue in despite of themselues; for they would be glad, if it were in their powre, to end so accursed a life; but none will oblige them with the benefit of such a death as would make them senselesse of their paines. And againe, the Scripture daignes not this continuall sufferance with the name of life; for to be continually in such extreame torments, seemes not so much to be a life, as a perpetuall death. Whervpon in Sacred writt; this damnation, is called a seconde death, to distinguish it from the first, wher vnto all that are vpon the face of the earth, are lyable. And albeit it be called death, yet is none extinguished therby; for to liue in continuall torment, is not to liue, but to dic. The same Doctor, in another passage, saith to the same pourpose. If the damned soules liue in those eternall
paines, where the vncleane spirits a^ tormented, they are rather to be said t^dy then liue, and that eternally. Fo^ there is no worse nor more dreadf^^ death, then when death cannot dy^* Pope INNOCENTIVS giues authoritie to that beleife, in these tearmes. Then (speaking of the accurse^ Eternitie) death shall be immortall. (...) death how much more sweete should thou be, if thou didst extinguish so dolorous a life, then to constraine one t^ liue in such hellish torments; and which is yet worse, torments of so long continuance. I, for the number of yeares in Hell, is numberlesse. The last yeare of those punishments shall neuer arriue. After a thousand million of yeares, there will remayne as many againe to be counted, and those also being sommed vp; we are to begin anew againe. CAIN after fiue thousand yeares of a liuing death, is, as in the first day of his tortures:
and after a thousand million ^f million of yeares, he shall begin ^new to suffer. And though the ^icked richman hath thirsted two ^^ousand yeares in the flames which ^oe burne, but not consume him, he (...) yet to expect, and shall expect for ^ternitie, one droppe of refreshing ^^ater, which shall for euer be de^yed him. When humane iustice ^oth adiudge a criminall to exqui^te tortures, for some great and ^^ormious crimes; to dy is reputed a ^uour, since by that meanes, he is ^eed from the cruell torme^ts which ^reife doth imprint in his body. But (...) the Diuine iustice which is exe^uted in Hell, there is no stroke fa^orable; where one is to languish ^or euer in a death which cannot ^ie. Which is a Hell in Hell, worse ^hen a thousand Hells.



Why there paines are eternall.
XXXVI.
BVt lets withdraw our view* Athanasia, from so horrible* spectacle, whose topp is Eternitie. And let vs put the last finga^ to this draught all red with flames with the reason which Deuines giue of the Eternitie of those paynes. I^ there any thing more conformable to the Diuine Iustice, say they, the^ to punish those eternally, who fo^ loosse pleasures, vanities, and transitorie toyes, haue contemned th^ torrent of eternall delightes, glorie riches, since that by the rule of equitie, the punishment is to haue proportion with the fault? Further, ad^ they, he that dyes in mortall sinne renouncing grace, which is as th^ Herbingar, and Porter of Glorie, i^surprised by death, in a state of s^peruerted
a sense, and in such an auersion from God, that it is credible, that if he had liued for euer, he had still persisted in his malice, and had bene buried in euil dayes, in so much, that by loosing his life, he did not, for all that, loose his will to offend, which makes him perish in his reprobation, and makes him worthy of an Eternitie of paines. Againe, seemes it not reasonable, that he should be punished in Gods great Eternitie, who hath offend God in the litle Eternitie of his life? Let vs add to this, that all which is in God being God himselfe, because he is all beeing, all essence, all substance without accidents, and conseque^tly, his iustice being equall with his mercy, if he reward a cup of cold water giuen in his grace, and for his loue, with an Eternitie; why should we find it strange, that he should eternally punish sinne, that accursed
nothing, or rather that proud Giant, which doth oppose his darksome priuation, against that diuine beeing, souueraignely lightsome. Yea, this truth, though heauen and earth passe, shall stand in force for euer, that God shall destroy euerlastingly, all that shall worke iniquitie, and that being driuen from the sight of his face, they shall suffer mortally eternall paynes. Those accursed soules shall one day heare the folish Virgins dismission, who came without the oyle of grace and Charitie. Begone, the gate of the eternall marriages, are shut against you for euer. Begone I know you not. And this daunting sentence, which shall be without Appeale, is pronu^ced in the burning Court of the worlds comsu^mation. Goe you accursed into eternall fires, prepared for the Diuell and the partakers in his reuoult. The Manna which of old, fell for 6. dayes vpon
Israel, ceased to fall the seauenth; and he that neglected to make prouision of two measures therof, the day before the Saboath, with fasting was forced to pay his negligence. Such as in the tyme of this life, lent to negotiate and labour, haue bene flouthfull in gathering the Manna of grace; shall not be receaued in the other life, which is the tyme wherin all worke ceaseth. The sluggard, saith the wiseman, who in winter fearing the cold hath neglected to till, shall reape onely in his feild bryers and nettles in haruest tyme: and pouertie, and hungar shall encompasse his gate. For which cause the same wiseman calls him prudent and considerate who tills and sowes in its season; threatening him with confusion and miserie, who sleepes and takes his ease, while he is to put his hand to the worke. Verily such a man deserues to be compared to horses and mules, who haue no vnderstanding,
and yet not to a generous horse nether, but euen to a iade, who hauing still at his sides so quicke and bloodie a spurre, as that of the thought, especially, of the accursed Eternitie, doth not striue to draw himselfe out of the durt of vice, and to spring swiftly on in the course of vertue. Alas what doth not a sick-body endure to be quite of his desease, what bitter potions doth he not take downe, what bleedings lancings burnings. In a word, what doth he not resolutly vndergoe to recouer his health, and to prolong for a tyme this mortall and miserable life; and yet to draw our selues out of the gates of death, and those also eternall, and out of the horrible tortures wherof this litle draught makes a weake representation, shall wee vse no endeuours?



An Apostrophie to God and the soule, vpon the accursed Eternitie.
XXXVII.
OEternitie! o powrefull, rigourous, and iealous God! God of Reuenge! o Lord thou art iust, and all thy iudgments are iustice and equitie it selfe. I adore them great God, yea my soule cast vpon the earth, and my mouth ioyned to the dust, I confesse that all thou dost, proceeds from a true and iust iudgme^t; and that all thy wayes are replenished with iustice. For who am I dust and ashes, a worme and not a man, to enter a dispute with thee? Who if thou wouldst obserue and examine our faults, who is able to sustayne thy face, and to enter into iudgment with thee? Yet as thou art soueraignely Good, thou permitst men to discusse matters
with thee. And being Truth it selfe, thou art willing, that they should propose vnto thee the things they conceaue to be iust and true. In this Confidence, o Lord, approching towards the Throne of thy mercy, after the consideration of those eternall paynes I haue now contemplated, I hope thou wilt permit my poore soule to make a weake sallie towards thee. Lord those soules which thou dost banish, to those endlesse flames, which deriue all their heate fro^ the fire of thy wroth, are they not the workmanshipe of thy hands? And is not thy worke mercy it selfe, as thy nature is goodnesse it selfe? Why then dost thou shut thy eares to their cryes, and of a pitifull Father, to those accursed soules, thou becomest, an inexorable, and seuere, I dare not say, a cruell Iudge, as thy seruant IOB tearmes thee, whom thou didst try
in manifold sufferances? Where are thyne aunient mercyes o Lord? hast thou forgotten to pardon, which is thyne ordinarie coustume? Why, hast thou reiected them for euer, and can they neuer appease thy anger? Ah! no Lord they know well, that which they demande is not for thy glorie; they that haue bene prodigall of thy fauours; that are not worthy to be called thy children, that can pretend nothing in the inheritance of saluation, nor in the portion replenished with light reserued to thy Saints. Their deeds of darknesse hath rendred them vnworthy of that bright day which knowes no night. Being no longer thy children, they cannot be heires of thy Sanctuarie; heires of the Land of the liuing; nor coheires with IESVS CHRIST whose pretious blood, and merits, they haue troden vnder their feete. Nay Lord,
euen they, doe not demande to depart out of Hell, nor to be freed from those paynes, which are iustly inflicted vpon them; for to appeare before thy wrothfull face, would be a hell and a Torture vnto them, incomparably more rigorous then all the torments they endure. Their onely desire is to be reduced to nothing, since they haue commit the works of sinne; which is a true nothing. But if thou daigne them vnworthy of this vnfortunate fauour, at least after many ages of paines, can they not expect some moment of release? shall not some litle drope of refreshment and solace, after many thousand of yeares, be sent to water their withered lipps, their thirsting throtes, their burning tongues? Say Lord, wilt thou for euer laugh at their liuing death? Wilt thou not for euer bow to their begging? O the God of my heart! o the
part of myne euerlasting inheritance! What's this that I heare in the botome of my heart? what dradfull Echo makes resound therin these words of horrour? I will be inexorable vnto them eternally. Softly, my soule, make a stand here, step not a foote further. Dost thou not see the firie sword in the Diuine Iustice's hand, threatening ouer thy head, if thou aduance a foote. Dost belonge to thee temerarious wretch, to sound God's Maiestie? Fearest thou not, to be ouerwhelmed with his glorie? Dost thou not see that these reprobates are relinquished by the spirit of his heart, and precipitated into an eternall obliuion in this second death? Leaue them there then, and kissing the sonne, that is, adoring the highnesse of the Scepter of this Diuine Iustice, reioyce together with the iuste in this iuste reuenge: and wash thy hands in the ruine, and bloode of
those sinners. And drawing light from their darknesse, compound a wholsome treackle of the venime of their infelicitie. Cast thyne eyes rather vpon the malice of sinne, and by an effect so horrible, forme a iudgment of the greatnesse of the Cause. Thinke if thou seest a louing Father iustly casting his sonne into a burning fornace; that thence thou oughtst to coniecture an enormious crime in the child; as well by reason of the greeuiousnesse of the punishment, as by the Fathers rigour. o Eternall Father, whose mercies are numberlesse, what an inward hate must thou needs conceaue against the vniust, and iniustice; since thou dost punish so rigorously, and so eternally, the soules thou bought at so great a price; as is the bloode of thyne owne sonne, blood which cryed better then that of Abel, bloode able to fetch out any stayne, to wash of
all offences, and to render them sknowie white, whom sinne had made cole-blacke, so that this ISOPE, this sopewort be applyed in a fitt tyme, in a tyme capable of receauing this plentuous redemption. Where are our thoughts, o my soule, how doth not dread put vs into a traunce, while sinne presents it selfe vnto our eyes, what a monster must it needs be, for whom so darksome a Dungeon and boisterous tempest is prepared; and fince that God who is infinitly good, is irreconciliably irritated against those reprobate soules? How oft, my poore heart, haue we merited those horrible punishme^ts? wast not as oft as we withdrew our selues from our dutie by mortall crimes, sinthens all the Diuels there were damned for one sinne? And are they not then so many singular obligations we haue to God, who expected vs so long to repentance?
in not suffering his vengance to to take vs in the manure. If we slile the Doctors, who by their care and skill, recouere vs, out of a dangerous sicknesse, our Esculapeses. If a deliuerie out of prison draw such an obligation vpon vs, towards the workers therof; If a Princes grace doe so much ingage vs to him; as likewise the fauour of being freed from fire or water, to our deliuerers. What shall we render to this good God, who, as often as we haue offended, hath recouered vs fro^ death, and death euerlasting? Death whose torment, doth far surpasse, all that can be said or thought of it. Propose vnto thy selfe, o my soule, a thing that shall neuer happen, according to the order of the Diuine Prouidence and Iustice, though otherwise possible to him that can doe all, that God had drawen out of this darke hole into which redemption enters
not, some one of the damned crue, to giue him tyme of repentance for his sinns: and consider what thankes he would render to his Creatour for so great a benefit; and how well he would husband this precious tyme, to regayne himselfe out of the midst of his dreadfull tortures. Now, my deare soule, thou must needes haue lost all sense and iudgment, if thou accnowledge not the benefit of preseruation to be no lesse, then this imaginarie deliuera^ce, since it withdrawes thee from the same torme^ts, merited by so many faults. Why doe not we then spend our selues in thankes giuing, why are we neglige^t in redeeming lost tyme, sloathfull in running to the remedie of Penance. The onely Table of safetie after the shipwrake of grace? O God full of Goodnes, who desires not the death of a sinner, but his conuersion and life. Ah! I begge this fauour of thee;
that at least I may performe some part of that, which he would doe, whom, by thyne extraordinarie power, and mercy without president, thou migstest haue deliuered out of this Gulfe of horrour. Ah! Lord I know this onely part, would worke my whole penance: for neuer would myne eylidds waxe dry, the aples of myne eyes would euer swime in their fountaines, night and day should I weepe. My cheekes should alwayes be watered, and my teares should be my dayly bread. I would imbrace all sorts of exteriour and interiour sorow, to auoyd those deuouring flammes, and the eternall rageings of that abominable Mansion, where thou art perpetually blasphemed. O God my mercy! Saue me from the Iawes of those roaring Lyons, prepared for their prey. Remoue me from before the sharpe hornes, of those sauage Vnicornes.
Indew me, o Lord, with the spirit of Compunction, and Penance, which is so necessarie to auoyde this Abisse. And thou, my soule, why dost thou dwell vpon this thought of horrour, why art thou vexed in it? Lift vp thy heart and hope in the mercy of the Highest. I, thou shalt yet againe praise him, the tyme of his mercy is not expired to thee. He is the saluation of thy face, and thy true God: no no by his assistance and grace, thou shalt beare no part in the abominable blasphemies of the region of the shadow of death: but thou shalt be aggreable vnto him, and shalt sing his prayses in the Land of the Liuing.


A passage to the blessed Eternitie.
XXXVIII.
HAppie land of the liuing! Athanasia, LAND OF PROMIS
flowing with the milke and honie of Diuine fauours and blessings (Land without thornes) free from the captiuitie of IACOB. How glorious things are reported of thee, o Citie of God! Sacred citie, whose fundations are placed vpon the holy mountaines of Eternitie, who art watered with an impetuous flood of felicitie and glorie, and with torrents of celestiall delightes. How louely are thy tabernacles! O mansion of the God of vertues, my soule and body doe swoone in the contemplation of thy wonders. O Lord how happie are they, who doe inhabite thy house^ they praise thee for euer and euer. Blessed is he who^ thou hast elected, and receaued into thy armes, he shall remayne for euer in the wishfull porches of thy heauenly Sion. Certes, Athanasia, my heart changing this vnfortunate obiect (wherin my pen was imployed in the precedent strokes,) to this other, wholy delightfull
one, of the blessed Eternitie, doth resent the same ioy, which the Mariners doe experience, when after a rough storme, they meet with a calme: the same alacritie which doth enlarge the victors hearts, when after a dangerous battell they triumphe ouer their foes, and diuide the plentuous spoyle. Now it is, that I may vsurpe the words of the Diuine Epithalamion. Winter is past, the raine and snow are blowen ouer, and flowres begin to appeare in our land, but flowres that are of fruite of honour and honestie, admirable fruites of the Land of Promis. There it is, that God doth wipe away the teares of his saintes. There are there, no greiues or plaintes: for all sortes of euils doe vanish in the presence of this vniuersall felicitie, euen as shades doe disappeare in the light's approach. And as wine doth taste sweeter after bitter amandes; and honie after the
tast of wormeseed; as deformitie doth raise the luster of an eminent beautie, it being the propertie of contraries the one to aduance the other by their neighbourhood: so after the harsh contemplation of so many astonishinge torments, the splendour of the eternall glorie, doth shine in myne eyes, as a lightsome day following out an obscure night. Such as doe exercise their Arts about fornaces, are accustomed from tyme to tyme, to releiue their weakned sight, in beholding some pleasing table, or to recreate them vpon some delightfull prospectiue. Sweet light of the heauenly Hierusalem, whose lampe is the lambe, who hath blotted out the sinns of the world, how fitly thou art represented to my eyes a litle to solace them, after they haue poursued the view of that burning fornace, which the wroth of God keepes eternally hote in the center
of the earth? But on the other side, as they that come out of a darke dungeon, haue difficultie on a souden to sustayne the splendour of a cleare day: so this souden returne from darknesse to light; from dolour to delight; from sorrow to ioy; from vnhappinesse to happ; from death to life; and from punishments to felicitie, doth giue a certaine assault to my hart; so true it is that the passage fro^ one extreamitie to another doth astonish the most constant mynd! The best experienced Mariners, hauing once passed the line, are alwayes a litle troubled when they are to alter the course of their nauigation, and to sayle vnder another Pole, guided by other Cardes, other starrs. And yet o happie change since we passe fro^ teares to langhter, from punishments to reward, and from paine to glorie.



The finenesse of this subiect.
XXXIX.
BVt who can without rauishment, o Athanasia, expresse the sweetnesses with which this incomparable subiect doth replenish our vnderstanding? O God if on day we shall come to behold, that which nowme vnderstand of the glorie of thy Citie, with what traunce shall we be seased, when we shall be made like vnto thee, in beholding thee such as thou art, and shall be tra^sformed into thy Image, and shall be conducted by thy spirit from light to light. It will be a farr other thing then the rauishment of IACOB vpon the sight of his faire RACHEL: for what comparison is there betwixt the Creatour seene clearly and not in a glasse, and a catiue creature. Those beauties, in that
disciples reuelations whom IESVS loued, is to the life represented vnto vs by this glorious Hierusale^, which he doth compare to a Bride richly adorned coming out to meet her Bridgroome. A fit comparison, since this glorious Eternitie, is no other thing then the eternall banquet of the marriages of the lambe. O faire IYDITH! who would not willingly endure the labours of the seige of Bethulia to enioy thee! and who dare complaine of these moments of tribulation of this afflicting life, spent in the conquest of thee? All the beauties of the Bridegroome and Bride, which are by the fingar of the Holy Ghost so delicately put downe in the Sacred Epithalamion, which we instile the Canticle of Canticles, are but shadowes compared to the measure of the light of glorie, which God in his blessed Kingdome hath prepared for his saintes! O choyce
soules, who like to other ESTERS, are designed for the imbracements of this eternall ASSVERVS, what can be found that can enter into comparison with your felicitie, since it shall passe all humane sense and capacitie? No neither the florishing Hierusalem, nor yet the Triumpha^t Rome can in any thing come neere vnto this happie Abode. For she drawes her light, from him who is wholy light, and darknesse cannot comprehend him, and who doth inhabite an inaccessible light. O my eyes let fall your eylides ouer your aples, and be blind to all that is faire vpon the face of the earth. For nothing can be pleasing in presence of this excelle^t obiect, of the eternall house of the God of Eternitie. O God ayde my sight, and inrich me with an Eagles ey, but let it be a heauenly one, that I may not be dazeled with the aspect of so great a splendour.



That the eternall felicitie is the perfection of all good things.
XL.
EVen as (Athanasia) the accursed Eternitie is the sinke of all the euils imaginable, as we haue alreadie showen; so is the blessed a collection of all the good things that can be wished; for there the desire shall be replenished with all that good is. And the Deuines to giue vs some knowledge of it, doe defime it: An eternall, immutable, and certaine condition, deuoyd of all euil of fault or paine, and odorned with all the aduantages of nature, grace, and glorie. So that, saith S. AVGVSTINE togeither with DAVID; this estate is absolute in euery point, seeing that the hungrie soule is there saciated with all the good things that can be desired. We haue called it an eternall
condition, in which we see what a faire aduantage it hath ouer the crownes and Empires of the earth, which stay so short a tyme vpon one head, and the ioy of whose possession, is mixed with a continuall feare of loosing them: for it is writte^ of the Kingdome of all ages, that it shall neuer haue end. We added, that it was not subiect to change, in which we discouer a notable difference betwixt this eternall felicitie, and the temporall ones of this world, which neuer continew in the same estate. All that is here below, are sensible of the perpetuall turning of the Primum Mobile. For this eternitie being God himselfe, which of his owne nature is immutable, it cannot be diminished: yea some Doctors doe hold, that the Blessed shall continually experience new accidentall glorie, which shall be vnto them a perpetuall subiect of new
songs. We haue said that it is certaine and sure: because the impeccabilitie of such as shall be made participant therof, by the freindshipp of God as the wisemans tearmes it, shall depriue them of all feare of falling from it; besids that the sentence of the reprobate being irreuocable, that of the blessed shall be of no lesse continuance. And of what continuance? of the verie fame with Gods beeing. But o feast of contentments where none of those which doe enioy are disgusted, no Israelite loathing this hidden Manna for the sweete and delightfull point of desire, shall remayne deuoyd of all paine amidst the pleasure of the fruition; so that by how much more they possesse what they desire, by so much more they desire to possesse it. Whence one of the Apostles said, that the Angells in heauen, desire to behold the glorious face of IESVS
set at the right hand of his Father in those places aboue, not that they see it not, but because the more they contemplate it, the more they desire to contemplate it. In such sort, that as in Hell the continuance of torments doth not harden the reprobate, whose paines are still as greene and sensible, as they were the first day. So in Heauen the Roses of glorie doe neuer fade, nor doth custome dull the continually liuely taste of those incomparable delightes. Goe then o worldlings o children of the earth, and forsake goods of such qualitie for the transitorie goods which doe possesse you, if we may giue so good a name to those smale blossomes of contentments, that florish and fade at once, which you gather here below with such strife of mynd; blossomes inuironed with thornes. Yes for either those goods are false, or at the most, not purely
good: and who soeuer would take the paines to seperate from their bulke, the euils wherwith they are mixed, should find that chaffe, feathers, and smoake haue waight, in respect of their lightnesse. For which cause our Sauiour doth exhort vs in the Ghospell, not to treasure vp riches in the earth, where they are subiect to ruste, and to the theife's violent hand, but to heape vp riches in heauen where all is safe and sure. No, none can possibly heape vp riches in these two so differe^t Abodes, Heauen and earth; for the Beautitude of the Kingdome of heauen, is promised to the poore onely; witnesse the example of the incompasionate Rich-man: and our Sauiours declaration of the almost impossible difficultie of the rich-mans entrie into Heauen. O how aduised is he, who herebelow gathers together the treasures of grace, and who co^uayes
the^ through the hands of the poore, in bills of exchange into the Eternitie of glorie, where such money is currant: for it is written, that good workes follow them that dy in our Lord and that good trees are knowen by their fruite in this land of the liuing, where he reapes benedictions, that hath sowen them in the land of the deade. And I pray you, how should not Eternitie be the perfection of all the good things, which the senses and heart can neuer comprehend, sythe^s God himselfe is the very great reward, of such as possesse it: very great in deed, syth they are rewarded beyond their seruice, euery perfect gift, and euery best present proceeding from the Father of lightes. Who doth not see that he him selfe is an vndrainable fountaine of all goodnes, being all desire, wholy to be desired, and the fulnes of all desires. He is that one necessarie thing
which compriseth in it selfe, by way of excellencie, all that is to be defired. Delightes without end are in his right hand, riches also and glorie, wisdome, goodnesse, powre, greatnes, beautie, the source of saluation, and the botome of all beatitude, as the Psalmist doth excellently sing. My saluation is in God, he is my glorie, my ayde, and all my hope is in him. For assurance of this truth, MOYSES demanding of God the happinesse to behold his face, I will shew the all good, said our Lord vnto him, in appearing vnto thyne eyes.


Of the place of the Blessed Eternitie.
XLI.
I Doubt, Athanasia, these generall discourses sets your mouth on water, and makes you desire to fill your appetite with more particular meates. To comply therefor
with your inclination, I will serue you vp for the first dish, a Draught of the place of this eternall Beatitude. Truly I might say that it is situated in his bosome, who makes Eternitie it selfe, and who being infinite, cannot be bounded by any place, being present in euery place by his beeing and powre; since that all is his, all comes from him, and all is in him, in him, I say, in whom we liue, moue, and are. But that you may not loose your selfe in those IMAGINARIE SPACES where this infinite thing makes abode, which cannether be comprised by the Heauen of Heauens, nor of heauen nor earth which he filleth with his immensitie, nor by any other place, I will tell you with all the grauest Doctors of the Church, that God from the begining of the world did create this Kingdome which he prouided for his Angells and Elect in the
Heauen called Empireall, that is to say of fire; not that it burnes, but by reason of the brightnes of its flame, and the splendour of its light. This highest Heauen was vnknowen to the auncient Astrologers, and is yet to the new, vnlesse by the light of faith, reuealed by God to the Church and her Doctors. For the Astrologers, like to all those that make profession of other mathematicall disciplines, grownding onely vpon sensible demonstrations, and making a iudgement of other places, by the diuers motions of the starrs; and this that we speake of being inuisible and immoueable, is placed aboue the knowledge and lawes of Astrologie. It is then a firme, stable, solide and inuariably settled heauen, called in holy Scrip. The firmame^t of heauen the heauen of Heauens, the Land of the liuing, the Seate and Throne of God: and in Geneses, Heauen created from
the begining, as BEDE, ALCVINE, TOSTATE, and the Maister of the sentences doe interprete it. And there all the Fathers doe establish the mansion of the glorie of God, together with his Angells and Blessed, following these words of holy writ. We haue a Mansion in heauen, not made with the hand of man. And our Sauiour said to his disciples, your reward shall be ple^tuous in heauen. And againe before his Ascension, he said vnto them, I goe to prouide you a place. And what place is this, but that where he is set at the right hand of the Maiestie in the highest? S. BASILE THE GREAT, S. CLEMENT Rom. S. CLEMENT Alexan. S. IOHN DAMASENE, PHILO IVDAEVS, STRABON and S. THOMAS amongst other Diuines, doe warrant this opinion.



Of the magnificence of the place.
XLII.
THus much concerning the situation, Athanasia, but for its magnificencie, what tongue can expresse it, what pen describe it, since our thoughts and senses cannot attayne thervnto? O Israel how great is the house of God, how ample his possessio^s! his Abode is goodlie, high, immense, and infinite, these are the words of the Prophete BARVCH. O eternall wisdome tis thou then, that dost powrefully extend thy force from one extreamitie to another, disposing all things with an incomparable sweetnesse: thus speakes the wise man. O how happie should I bee, said the good TOBIE, if I could see the light of Hierusalem. O God, said DAVID, how I am in loue with the beautie of thy house,
and with the place of the habitation of thy glorie. And if the glorie of God incompassng the Temple of SALOMON, that miracle of man's Art and industrie, added a grace vnto it, which did rayse this maister-peece aboue all the workes of the earth: what shall that place be, where the Saintes, in the light of gloric, see the increated and inaccessable light of the Dietie. O you DAVID's houses of Cedars hyde your selfes, house of SAVLTVS which SALOMON built for his pleasures vpon the Mount-Libane; yea euen you beauties of Libane hide your selues, faire topps of Carmel and Saron. Vayle thy selfe o thou throne of SALOMON, thou incomparable, yet humane worke; for who dare make the handeworkes of man, enter into comparison, with the mightie workmanship of God? What Pallace, euen of those that appeare the most proud
and magnificent durst one compare with the King of glorie's, incomparably more great, more wise, and more powerfull then SALOMON; since all the pompe of this sonne of DAVID, is lesse prised in the Scripture, then the simple nakednes of a place in the feilds, yea in this vaile of teares. Hath this wretched and miserable world, any similitude wherby we might make a conceipt of the excellencie, where teares and complaintes are permitted no entrie, sith it is crowned with all the contentments and perfections that can be desired. In vaine doth S. IOHN in his reuelations represent vnto vs this heauenly Sion, as a Citie all of gold and precious stones, these being but shadowes of its true greatnes, since the Heauens which we discouer, with the Sunne and all the other starrs are but the pauement of the eternall firmament, the inhabitants wherof
treade vnder their feete the front of the brightest starrs. All this vniuers, the obiect and wonderment of the beholding eye, and all this great world which hath so many louers and admirers, is but a miserable stable full of dunge and durt, in comparison of this seate of glorie of God's elect, and the God of the Elect. O great Apostle, how good reason thou hadst in contemplation of this eternall Felicitie (which consists in the sight of the true God, and of that IESVS which he sent) to estee^^ all the rest durt and dung? These visible heauens which in so high a strayne sing the glorie of their maker. These nights and dayes, which doe proclame his prayses through all the earth: and so many wonderfull works which doe rayse our mynds by sense, towards the greatnes of this Architect, who sustaines this great bulke with three
fingars, are but the footstooles of the Throne of the eternall Salomo^, and stayres onely by which we mount to his glorie. If we should here giue bridle to our consideration, and permit our mynd to walke through the multitude of different creatures, which by their varietie doe so beautifie the face of the vniuers, doe you not thinke, Athanasia, that it would be a course of too long a breath, and such, as was a subiect to so many, the pens of antiquitie, amongst others S. BASILS, S. AMBROSES, and ORIGENS in their Exam. and the Expounders of Genesis. Let vs content our selues to draw from this spacious prospect, this inference. If the world, a place of Nature, be a Stage, wherin is presented so many pleasant things: how rauishing shall those beauties be, which God shall manifest vnto his friends in the Mansion of his glorie, the Paradice
of his delightes? If he permit the wicked, his enemies, such as offend him, to inioy in this visible world so many delightes and pleasures; what will he co^municate to those, whom he daignes to crowne with his heauenly and eternall fauours, in the State of glorie? A Stoicall Philosopher speaking of the felicitie of blessed soules, according to the light of nature, obscured with the shadowes of Paganisme, could say, that as much difference as there is, betwixt the dungeon of a womans wombe, and this great world; so much is there betweene the wonders of this heaue^ly beatitude of vertuous soules departed from their bodies, and the greatest beauties which are seene in heauen and earth. To what length are we to driue this dissimilitude, we that are enlightened with the light of fayth, and taught by so many faithfull promises, as are contayned
in the Scripture touching this blessed and vnconceauable Eternitie. O Israel how goodly are thy tabernacles, how delightfull thy Pauillions: gardens watered with floods and fountaines are not so florishing, nor are the vallies abounding with fruite, so aboundant. These are the words of a Prophete, who yet doth but sparingly expresse the delightes of this happie Abode: where the light is continuall, and the dayes without nightes, by reason of Gods presence, who is wholy light, and who doth not suffer those that doe follow and adore him, to remayne in darknesse. Wherevpon the spirits which doe serue before his Throne are called Angells of light. It is a resplendant Residence, not standing in need of those tortches, the Sunne and Moone, which are onely made to giue light, to this low and elementarie world, the heauenly Lambe
being the Lampe, which doth lighten the eternall Sion. A Residence, where the flowres doe continually accompaignie the fruites, and where the extreamitie of heate and cold are banished, to make place to an agreeable temperature, and farr other then that earthly Paradice (a garden of delight) wherin were placed our first Parents, created in originall Iustice. A Residence in conclusion, wholy constant, and of an eternall durance. From whence death is excluded, and the qualities, subiect to bring in alteration and change, are banished; and where all the inhabitants shall in some sort be made participant of the immutabilitie of God. This stabilitie, is, in my opinion, as it were, the crowne of this faire place, euen in that name, farr differing fro^ the figure of this world, which incessantly slides away, not vnlike to ones shape in a mirrour,
which in an instant is both form'd and past according to S. IAMES. O Citie of peace! o triumphant Hierusalem! o Court of the eternall Salomon! when shall we come, when shall we appeare before the face of this King of glorie? when shall we be led into his Cellers? when shall we passe through thy peaceable gates, gates dearer to God then all the Tabernacles of IACOB? O delightfull Abode, o wishfull Residence; if euer I forgett thee, let me not onely forget my right hand, but euen my selfe: for if I loose thee, am I not eternally lost, without all hope of redresse, or mercy?


Of the essentiall happines of the blessed.
XLIII.
BVt you will aske me, Athanasia, what will be the highest point of the glorie of those
that doe inhabite this place of delightes. O my deare soule, if neuer mortall ey saw what they see, how doe you thinke I shall be able to expresse it, with tongue or pen? Is it, in your opinion, any thing which can fall within the compasse of a discours, or can be put downe vpon paper? Howbeit we will declare vnto you that which we haue discouered, by the obscure light of faith, rather in a glasse after a darke sort, then openly, face to face, which is reserued for the next life, as a reward for hauing beleeued it, without seeing it. It is therfore the constant doctrine of the Catholike Church, that the essence of the eternall glorie doth consiste in the sight of the soueraigne well-beloued, in the loue of the soueraigne well-beholden: doe you vnderstand these few words well, Athanasia, which doe lay open vnto you, all that you are to beleeue in
this matter of the essentiall felicitie of the Blessed? For leauing a part all the thornie disputes and contestations of the schoole, vpon this point of the vision of the vnderstanding, or of the fruition of the will, the principall faculties of the soule, wherin doth reside the happinesse of this supreme glorie, whose obiect is God. Omitting, I say, their debate, who will place Beatitude in an act of the vnderstanding; and theirs, that will haue it to consist in an Act of the will, we will follow the comon consent of Doctors, and all the schooles, who reiecting, in this behalfe, all partialitie, haue now for a comon Maxime: That it consistes in two actes, of the vnderstanding and will, grownding therin vpon the Scripture, which now assignes the one, now the other, and somtymes both together. As when we reade, that eternall life, is to know one onely God,
And againe. That we see now obscurely, but in glorie face to face. And in S. IOHN, we shall see him such as he is: which doth sufficiently proue, that supreme felicitie consisteth in the intimate vision of God. When againe we marke this passage, thy Elect, o Lord, shall be drunk with the aboundance of thy house, and thou shall giue them to drinke of the torrent of pleasure. And in the Ghospell, enter into the ioy of thy Lord. And againe, your ioy shall not be taken from you, by which is sufficiently showen, what part the will is to haue in the essentiall glorie. And who would not gather hence, that it consisteth in the vision, and fruition of the two faculties; God, who is infinitly greater then our harts, filling them both with vnimaginable delightes, being, in qualitie of Soueraigne Truth, the obiect of our vnderstanding, and as he is the Soueraigne Good, the obiect
of our will, its repose and Center? But when the Psalmist sings. Taste and see, how sweete is our Lord, doth he not ioyne them both together, being no lesse proper to the will to taste, then to the vndersta^ding to see, and herein we follow the interpretation of the learned HVGH OF S. VICTOR. And yet after the same Diuine Psalmist, had said, thou shall giue them to drinke of the torrent of pleasure, doth he not add? and in thy light we shall see light. This opinion is co^firmed by a Bull of Benetts the twelueth, who defines, that the soules of the Elect, are blessed by these actes of seeing and enioying. And the Romane Cathechisme, put out by the Councell of Trents order, placeth essentiall Beatitude in the vision and fruition of God. It were an easie thing to show, that the auncient Fathers of the Church, placed the essentiall beatitude, sometymes in the one, sometymes
in the other Power, and sometymes also ioyntly in both, but the breuitie which I proposed vnto my selfe, from which I doe insensibly stray, makes me cut of many peeces of those great Oracles, which would wonderfully beautifie this stroke. Lets soberly content our selues with this smale reason. If the Blessed soule, did not imbrace the heauenly Spouse in his glorie with both her armes, which are the vnderstanding and will, doubtlesse she would not be wholy satisfied: for who knowes not euen by experience, that the will is not carried with lesse bent toward Good then the vnderstanding towards the Truth. Whence I gather, that necessarily her desire must be replenished with all sorts of good things, according as the Scripture doth teach vs, and the ensuing strokes will giue vs more amply to vnderstand. Therfore to speake properly
essentiall Beatitude doth consiste in the perfect vnion of the soule to God, being made, as the Apostle tearmes it, one selfe same spirit with him: which is done in the soule by Gods inward penetration, called by the Diuines, nor can we expresse it in any other terme, an illaps; which, me thinkes, vpon necessitie, we may make vse of in our tongue, as well as of the word Relaps; finding that nether more rude, nor more improper then this, which is receaued, and authorised by custome. Now this illaps of God into the soule, doth replenish it with the glorie of God himselfe, and doth as it were, deifie it, according as S. IOHN speakes: we know that we shall be made like vnto him, when we shall see him, as he is. So that the soule shall be filled and replenished with God, as the Moone, when she is perfectly full, with the light of the Sunne: or as a sponge when it is
throughly wett, and filled with liquor. And God vniting himselfe vnto her, as the fire is vnited to the burning iron, following the Conte^platiues ordinarie similitude, shall be ioyned vnto her, and shall vnite her so inly to himselfe, that she shall be as it were transformed into God, who shall be, as saith the Spouse in the Canticles, intirely hers, as she againe shall be intirely his. Which caused S. BERNARD to pronounce those holy and louing words; our Beatitude, and our reward is to see God, to liue with God, to liue of God and in God; to be with God and in God, who shall be all in all. Now where this soueraigne Good is, who can doubt but there is also the soueraigne ioy and Felicitie, true Libertie, perfect Charitie, eternall Assurance, and assured Eternitie. In God is true Gladnes, compleat Knowledge, perfect Beautie, continuall Peace, Pietie, Bountie, Light, Vertue,
Honestie, Sweetnes, true Life, Glorie, Praise, Repose, gracious Friendshipp, and greatfull Concord. Hitherto are the words of this mellifluous Doctor.


The happines of the point of the soule.
XLIV.
BVt perfectly to vnderstand, in what this essentiall glorie doth consiste, we must call to mynd, Athanasia, the diuision of the bodie and the soule, wherof the Prophete speakes, administring an occasion to misticall Diuines to diuide man's soule into three degrees, the inferiour, superiour, and supreme. Or if you had rather, into three portions, the lowest, the highest, and the middle. And they seate Appetite in the lowest region, the powres in midle, but in the highest the point of the mynd, the flowre, vnitie, or
essence of the soule, the Latines Mens, the Grecians (...), the Hebritians, Nesamah, for all these words, doe but signifie one and the same thing. Now to speake onely in this place of the highest, God being Spirit, a most pure Act, and mostone essence, although in glorie he be vnited to euerie blessed soule, yet is his vnion more excellent, and eminent in this highest portion of the soule, then in those below, euen as we obserue in mans soule, which is all in all the body, and all in euery part therof, yet is more nobly, that is, it doth more nobly exercise its functions in the head, then in the other members of the bodie. So say the Mistikes, that this highest portion of man's soule is the Spouse his bed, Salomon's coutch, his Cabinet, and the place of his more particular delights. Ther is the Diuine essence vnited to the essence of the soule;
there the spirituall marriages (marriages the fullnesse of our eternall felicitie) celebrated, wherof so much mention is made in the holy Scripture. For as the Bridegroome and Bride are two in one flesh, by the sacred band which doth tye them together; so the Blessed soule, by this vnion with her Principle, and application to her end, becomes one spirit with him, through the excesse of that Charitie, which is the band of all perfection. Thus is the soule transformed and transfigured into light by the spirit of God, made participant of the Diuine nature, and conformable to the liknesse of his Maiestie. Tis true, that we are by nature made to the liknesse and similitude of God, whose picture is so liuely exprest in the soule, which is one in Essence, and trine in faculties: Yet much more by grace, which makes vs, as it were, certaine looking-glasse,
wherin that glorioule Sunne makes the rayes of his light and loue meete, while he expresseth his perfections therin. Yet the Saints who are in glorie, whose faces are marked with his splendour, and doe shine like the Sunne for perpetuall eternities, are yet incomparably more liuely pictures of the Diuinitie. For euen as the Sunne meeting with a thicke and darksome cloude in the aire, doth sometymes so deeply imprint its beames vpon its face, that it appeares another Sunne; so are the Blessed in Heauen so transformed into God, that they shewe as so many Gods, and as so many dearest children of the Highest, as DAVID deliuers it. This excellent beautie, with which the Diuine presence doth adorne them, was cause, that S. IOHN espying an Angell, whom he tooke for God, had adored him, if that
spirit, no lesse humble then glorious bright, had not giuen him to know that he was his fellow-seruant. And in my opinion, in this neere resemblance to God, the verie toppe of the eternall glorie of the blessed, is placed. For what, thinke you, is God's owne glorie and felicitie, but the life which he hath eternally of him selfe? the most cleare knowledge which he hath of his immutable Truth; and the most arde^t loue which he hath towards his owne infinite Goodnes? His Beatitude consisting in the vision, loue, and fruition, which the Diuine and increated Persons of the Blessed Trinitie, haue, of their owne mutuall knowledge, Loue, and eternall, perfect and infinite complacence. Now the soule of the Blessed being raysed to the vision, loue, and fruition of the same Diuine Perso^s, and of their Diuine and most indiuisible Esse^ce,
ought not her supernaturall and inineffable life, by the resemblance which is betwixt her and God's felicitie, to be said to be the accomplishment of her glorie? since that, without all feare of change, she is wholy attentiue to the cleare contemplation of the prime and soueraigne Truth, inflamed with the loue of the supreme and increated goodnes, and hath the fruition of the infinite and vnspeakable sweetnes of God. O truly liuing and happie life! when shall it be that we shall liue in thee, and by thee? when shall we, o my soule, inhabite this heauenly Hierusalem built as a Citie, and with her glorious Citizens be made participant of him, who is still himselfe, immutable, and whose yeares neuer decay?



Of the felicitie of the powres of the soule, and first of the memorie.
XLV.
THis essentiall Beatitude, Athanasia, is extended, and doth spread it selfe out, yet diuersly, in the lower degree of the soule, to witt there, wherin the three principall faculties or powres doe reside. For euen as the Prophete to rayse the widowes deade child, did shorten himselfe vpon this litle body, and did apply his mouth to its mouth, his hands to its hands, and his feete to its feete: So God, who shall be all to all, shall fill all the soule, with the abundance of his bountie, and shall co^municate vnto it a Diuine life, which shall not feare the assaultes of death. The memorie being entered into the liberties of our Lord, shall call to mynd the effectes
of his iustice, and no lesse those of his mercy: for she shall sing; no, neuer will I forgett thy iustifications, o Lord, since in them thou hast giuen me life. Fild with this rauishing, and no lesse pressing then present obiect, she shall breath out the remembrance of his sweetnes, and shall exalt his adorable iudgements. This remembrance shall be her soueraigne delight. O how she shall call to mynd the sweetnes of the duggs of this incomparable goodnes, farr passing the fuming wines of worldly delightes. In how high a strayne shall she take the memorie of this supreme sanctitie! Alas how can she forget him, whom she hath so inwardly present, and who shall be more in her then her selfe, and to whom she shall be so strongly tyed in adauantine, and diamantine chaynes, that nothing shall euer be able to diuerte her. Blessed
memorie replenisht with the fairest Idea's that can possibly inhabit a heart! and which then, shall be a Magazine and memoriall of heauenly wonders! whether she make reflection vpon things past, how dearely shall she conserue the memorie of the incomparable obligations which she shall haue to this Creatour, Conseruer, Redeemour and Glorifier of her beeing. Such as grace shall haue led from greatest sinns to repentance, fauours before bounding, where malice did superabound, o God! how highly shall they sing the sacred Canticle of the Diuine mercy? And those who by the same grace shall haue conserued the first stole of their innocencie; and being preserued from the abomination of desolation (whose deluge doth ouerflowe the whole vniuerse) shall haue bene drawen to the safe harbour of saluation by the chaynes
of loue and humanitie, will not they haue reason to beare a part in the fame Canticle, and to pronounce, that that mercy which conserued them vnstayned amidest the worlds impurities, is a portion of that which is eternally grounded and built in Heaue^. The royall Prophete calling to mynd, out of what an Abisse of miseries the Diuine goodnes had reclaymed him, recalling him so sweetly to the accnowledgment of his faults, coniures his soule and all his interiour powres to blesse God, exciting his memorie neuer to permitt his benefites to fall into a disloyall obliuion; for he it is, that pardons, saith he, all thyne infirmities; who cures all thy wounds; who recouers thee from eternall death; and who crownes thee with his mercyes. O God what must this King of penitents needs say in heauen, if he spoke thus in this vaile of teares, reduced by a
holy repentance from his iniquities, to the state of grace. When the Saintes, whom God hath pardoned many faultes (for there are in Heaue^ penitent sinners of all kinds) shall see them selues deliuered from the innumberable torments which they contemplate in the accursed Eternitie, and which they had as oft deserued, as by their malice they had bene separated from God, will they not haue great reason to say with the Psalmist? Thy mercy, o Lord, and thy iustice shall for euer be the subiect of our song, vpon this shall our Psalme-singing be imployed, whilst we walke in this immaculate way in which thou hast put vs. And if the memorie of paynes and perills past, euen in this world, be so delightfull, how much more shall the Saintes and martyrs, who haue suffered much for the Almighties sake haue cause to reioyce in this memorie.
While they walked in the way of this mortall life, they sowed in teares, but in the heauenly Sion, they shall reape an eternall ioy. They shall sing this pleasant Song: We haue past through fire and water, but in the end we are entred into refreshment. And they shall blesse those light and transitorie moments of tribulation, which brought them to eternall glorie. And if their memorie doe stay vpon the present felicitie which they feele, and of which they haue a liuely sense, with what contentment shall they not be crowned, in tasting the ineffable goodnes of God, who rewards them infinitely beyond their merits? Yea, if they enlarge themselues vpon the tyme to come, (if their be any tyme to come in the immoueable and euer-present state of Eternitie) and if they consider the new discoueries of gusts and contentments, which
they shall continually make in the Abisse of this infinite Beautie and Goodnes of God, haue they not a large feild of ioyfullnes and thankesgiueing? I will omit the Sciences with which she is furnished by him who is called the God of Sciences, and who teacheth men science, and especially that Queene of Sciences DIVINITIE, which consisteth in the Contemplation of God, and which is the true knowledge of Saintes. For I pray you what doe not they, saith S. GREGORIE, know, who see him that knowes all?


The aduantages of the vnderstanding.
XLVI.
OVr manner of knowing and vnderstanding, during this mortall life, stands in need of the meditation of senses, whence this Philosophicall Axiome, nothing
enters into the vnderstanding, which past not first through the senses. And verily, that which comes to the knowledge of sense, is but superficiall. For example, how doth our sight know, but by a species or representation which the obiect of this sense, sends out to our eye, which the Maisters tearme, species sensibilis, and is the cause that we see, and know by sight. What soeuer enters into the knowledge of our vnderstanding by this gate, is admitted in no other sort. In like manner it is of other senses touching sensible and corporall things. There are others more spirituall, as the Notio^s, or Principles of Artes and Sciences, which our vnderstanding conceiues by speculation. But how doth it conceaue them, but by a subtile, delicate, and spirituall Image, which is called Species intelligibilis. And then, by how many windings doth this
species passe? how many changes and alterations doth it endure, by the Common sense, the phantasie, the vnderstanding styled actiue, and then by the passiue, before it put on the proper shape to become intellectuall? Loe then, how our naturall knowledge is formed by species and Images. Yea euen the knowledge of Faith, though supernaturall, enters not into our soule, but vnder some kind of composition, some simple, vniuersall and abstracte cloud, which is Faith. Hence it is, that the Apostle speaking of that kind of knowledge, by Faith, compares it to an obscure sight, and as it were to that of a glasse. And who knowes not that we see but meerely in a glasse, by meanes of the species which are formed in it, a species which formes another in our eyes. So our vndersta^ding which is the ey of our soule, doth not asse^t to the truthes of Faith
reuealed by God, but by hearing them by the voice of the Church and her Pastures: (For Faith is by hearing) or by reading them in the Creede and Canonicall bookes. But it fares not so, Athanasia, with the knowledge of the vnderstanding in the blessed Eternitie. For there it shall see God without species, without representation. The Deitie vniting, ioyning, and applying it selfe in such sort vnto it, that that inward presence shall be in lieu of species. O deare God! how neerely doth this vnion approach vnto vnitie, and with what wonders is this application filled! The verie proper essence of the Diuine Truth being receaued into the vnderstanding without all Image or species. And then the peace of God which passeth all vnderstanding, shall conserue and possesse the heartes and vnderstandings, that is to say, the wills and vnderstandings
of those happie soules. O who is able to expresse the incomparable happines of those, who without vayle, without glasse, without obscuritie shall see face to face, (being enlightened, and freed from all dimnesse and confusion,) that glorious face which the Psalmist with such instance pursueth? O what a glorie shall it be to behold, without being oppresst with the greatnes of so high a Maiestie, those adorable, ineffable, incomprehensible misteries of the most holy Trinitie! what a gracious fauour shall it be, openly to discouer the eternall generation of the WORD, issuing out of the Fathers bosome, a generation, of which the Prophete pronounceth with admiration, who is able to relate it? what a communication shall it be to see the Diuine communications? yea the communication of communications, which is that of the eternally
reciprocall loue, and reciprocally infinite, of the Father to the Sonne, and the Sonne to the Father, whence is produced as from one same Principle, the Holy Ghost? Because the Father and the Sonne hauing but one will which doth loue, and one goodnes which is loued, the fountaine of this production can be but one. O misterie of misteries! which it is better to admire then to deciphere, and better to speake nothing of it, then too litle. I had rather, in this place which is not alloted to thy explication, imitate the Seraphins, who doe vayle their eyes and feete, and fold their winges; and content my selfe, in protesting my beleife and alleagance in these words of the wellbeloued disciple of IESVS CHRIST: There are three who giue testimonie in heauen, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and those three are one. I adore thee o great
God in the Trinitie of thy persons; and in the vnitie of thy essence, and I doe sinke, and become nothing before thyne infinite greatnesse. What ioy, Athanasia, hath this beatified vnderstanding to discouer this great misterie hidden fro^ the worlds creation, to witt, the Hypostaticall vnion of the eternall Word with the flesh, which we call Incarnation. What a number of secretes are conteyned in this great secrete? what a number of wheeles are fastened in this one wheele? that is, what misteries doe depend of this misterie? and what a fire amidst this wheele, fire which our Sauiour brought into the world, to the end it should burne all the hearts of the faithfull with his loue, what delight shall it be to behold this Abisse of beauties and perfections, which are in God by way of excellencie, and infinitly aboue all that we are able to imagine
in the Attributes which we frame of him. In this heauenly vision, as in the liuely fountaine of all light, the shades of errours, doubtes, opinions, and ignorances shall vanish, which doe inuiron and incompasse vs in the almost palpable darknes of the Egipt of this life. Faith it selfe, which reuealed vnto vs so many meruelles of God, and of his glorious Citie, shall disappeare in this happie Abode, where we shall see, according as we shall haue heard and beleeued. Nether shall Hope be any more, because we shall enoye that, which by Hope we expected. Charitie alone shall neuer faile: neuer shall any thing cause her holy flame to die out; contrariwise, in glorie she shall be accomplished, and come to the hight of her perfection. What a delightfull entertaynement shall it be for the vnderstanding, to consider the windings of that wonderfull
clocke of the Diuine Prouidence, as well in the gouernement of the world in generall, as of all the soules in particular? and what thankesguings shall it render to the fatherly care of the Diuine Goodnes, whilst it shall admire the wayes of God in the meanes which he hath vsed, so amiably to draw it to so great a felicitie? O hight of the riches of the knowledge and wisdome of the highest, shall it cry out, how wonderfull are thy wayes, and how incomprehensible thy iudgements. Then shall it be, that to the confusion of the great Dragon, homicide from the begining, that this word shall be seene accomplished: you shall be as Gods knowing good and euil: For the vnderstanding cured of all desease of ignorance, and enioying all good exempt from all euill, shall perfectly know them both.



Of the light of Glorie.
XLVII.
BVt before I passe ouer this felicitie of man's vnderstanding which he shall enioy in Heauen, I must tell you one thing, Athanasia, which cannot be concealed from you, without depriuing you of a pleasant and important knowledge. True it is, that a created vnderstanding shall behold God aboue in his glorie; without the helpe of any Image or species at all; yet not so, as the Angelicall Doctor showes verie well, as that it sees him by the face of its naturall sight, which is as litle able to sustayne the brightnes of the increated light of the Diuinitie, as the night-birde to endure the Sunne beames. How then shall the created vndersta^ding see the Diuine Essence without any species? By the
light of Glorie, as the Diuines tearme it, a speciall grace by which God doth fortifie and inable it: a created light making the vnderstanding which it doth inhabit, strong enough to approach the otherwise inaccessible light of the Diuinitie, as doth the Eagle the Sunne. And it is of this Grace Herbinger of Glorie, that S. THOMAS vnderstands that passage of the Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans: God's grace is eternall life. And that: eternall life, saith S. IOHN, is to see God. It is of this light of Glorie, that all the Doctors vnderstand that saying of DAVID: In thee o Lord is the source of life, and in thy light we shall see light: that is to say, by the ayde of the created light, wherwith thou shalt clothe the vndersta^dings of thy Elect, they shall be able to fixe their intellectuall sight vpon the brightnes of Saints, which is thy Deitie. Euen then as in this life we know
the things of the world by a naturall light; and those of grace by the light of Faith, an infused and supernaturall light: so to see God in his Glori^, which is an increated light, the vnderstanding must be assisted by a created light, which doth dispose it to sustayne the shine (which would otherwise dazle and blind) of that infinite brightnes. And thus (holds on the Angell of the Schoole) the Essence of God shall be seene by the vnderstanding, without all species on the part of the Diuine essence; but on the part of the vndersta^ding, this created light of Glorie strengthening it, shall be to it as a certaine represe^tation to take in and receaue the light of the Diuinitie. Nor is their subtiltie to be regarded, who would make vs beleeue, that as the Sunne is seene by its owne light; so the increated light of the Diuinitie is seene by it selfe, without the mediation
of any created light, vnderstanding as it were literally those words of DAVID; In thy light we shall see light, that is, the light of thy Diuinitie by it selfe. For as we know the things of Grace by the infused light of Faith onely, so are we to say the like of the knowledge of the things of essentiall Glorie, which consisteth in the vision of God, named by the Diuines Intuitiue Beatitude. And againe, who granted those subtile Speculators; that the light it selfe of the Sunne, is the cause it is seene, since its beames doe rather weaken and blind, then strengthen and perfect our sight; wittnesse that wilfull Philosopher, who lost his eyes by setting them too fixedly vpon the Sunne. And verily the same would happen to the created vnderstanding before the increated light of the eternall Maiestie, and it would be oppressed
with that infinite and inaccessible light, if God did not dispose it to this felicitie, by a particular aptitude, in strengthening it by the light of Glorie.


Of diuers degrees of Glorie.
XLVIII.
ANd it shall be this light of Glorie, Athanasia, which shall make the diuers mansions, which the Scripture mentions to be in the house of the Heaue^ly Father, the blessed Eternitie. For as one and the same fountaine doth diuide it selfe into diuers cha^nalls, in a greater or lesse quantitie, according to their sundrie capacities: so the vnderstandings of the Blessed, shall see the increated light of the Diuinitie, proportionably to the created light of Glorie, which God shall forme in them, according to the diuersitie of
their merite. For there, euery one shall be rewarded according to his workes, sith workes follow the deade to punishment or felicitie. And as the starts which appeare in the Heauens, receaue more or lesse of the Sunns light, the fountaine of theirs, according as they are lesse or greater. So, saith S. PAVLE writing to the Citicens of Corinth, the degrees of glorie shall be different, as one starre differs from another in brightnesse. For to affirme with IOVINIAN that Beatitude is equall in all the Blessed, is an errour fully refuted by S. HIEROME (who wrot against this Heretike) and condemned by the Councells. True it is, saith S. THOMAS, that on the part of the Obiect, which is God beholden of all his Elect, Felicitie is equall, but the inequalitie proceeds from the fruition of this obiect, according to the capacitie or incapacitie of the
vnderstanding which doth contemplate the same. But what is the cause of this measure? The light of glorie. And whence the measure of this light, but from the greater or lesse Charitie which inhabites the heart? For as following the dimerit of offence, the eternall paynes are differe^t, so the Diuine Iustice will haue the reward diuersified according to the worth and degree of Charitie, which is as pure gold, the measure of all merit. A consideration which being well pondered, would set a sharpe spurre of desire to the sides of our heart, to aduance and perfect vs in this Queene of vertues, and carefully to mannage the occasions of well-doing, and all the moments of this mortall life, since according to the rancke of this qualitie, we shall beare away greater or lesser aduantages of Glorie, the least degree of which, is better then the Empire of
a thousand worlds. And if the blessed soules were not satisfied and conte^t, as indeed they are, with this full, pressed, and ouerheaped measure of felicitie falling into their heart: And if any kind of sorrow could haue entire into a State so replenished with happines, this would it be, that they had not imployed all the instants of their life to make progresse in that vertue, which makes them so much more capable of the powre of our Lord, as it is found to haue bene more emine^tly in them. O how true it is, that he who sowes spareingly shall reape in the same measure. And he that sowes in benedictions, shall reape a plentuous crope of benedictions. O centuple of this life! how oft shalt thou be centupled in the life to come? In those Diuine and celestiall Abodes, called by the Scripture MANSIONS, some are placed higher then others, saith S. AVGVSTINE,
and doe behold God more clearely. And S. GREGORIE speaking of the same subiect, The great and litle, saith he, are in Glorie, but they enioy it more or lesse, according to the diuersitie of their merit. Nor are we vpon this word Mansions to imagine to our selues, separated Celles, or Quarters a part in the heauenly Hierusalem, where there is a perfect societie amongst the Blessed, together with a Communitie of all good things, each one reioyceing no lesse in anothers felicitie then in his owne, all this holy Compainie hauing but one Soule and one Heart in God, the one and onely Obiect of their desires. But by that word, saith S. THOMAS after S. AVGVSTINE, we are to conceaue diuers degrees of Charitie and rewards, which are had in this plentifull Rest, where the Saintes doe reside for euer, as in the happie repose of the LAND OF PROMISSE.



In what measure the beatified vnderstanding sees God in Heauen.
XLIX.
IT is no smale question, Athanasia, to know how far the vnderstanding fortified with the light of Glorie, doth extend it selfe in the co^templation of the Diuine Essence, which it beholds without all helpe of species or representation. But the Angell of the schoole giues a worthy satisfaction to this holy curiositie, in teaching vs that God, according to IEREMIE, being, by reason of his infinitie, incomprehensible to euery created thought, can neuer be comprehe^ded by any vndersta^ding, with what euer light of Glorie they be adorned and assisted. Because euery creature being bounded, is not capable to comprehend an infinite Obiect. Hence we haue that fine
and necessarie distinction, that the blessed shall see God, All indeed, but not totally; they shall see him all, because being most simple, he cannot be seene but he is all seene. But againe, wheras he is infinite, there nether is, nor can be any capacitie out of himselfe which can totally comprehend him, nor imbrace that immense Infinitie, which is onely knowen of him selfe. Wee haue some semblance of this Truth, which cannot be seene, vnlesse it be all seene, and yet is it neuer totally seene, though it be euen a limited creature, and hath nothing comparable to the Creatour. So doe the fish and fowles inioy the vast extent of the Sea and ayre, yet what fish did euer swime in all the waters; and what bird did euer with flight measure the ayres extent? All this notwithstanding is possible, because it is finite. But the Diuinitie which is
boundlesse cannot be totally seene. For who did euer sound the depth of such an Abisse? And who hath euer knowen the sense of our Lord? Herein is discouered the impertinencie of AETIVS and ENNANIVS old Heretikes, who affirmed that God could be comprehended by a creature, as though, forsooth, an illimited thing, could be shut vp within limites. An impertinencie pertinently refuted by those great lightes of the Church, S. BASILE, S. GREGORIE OF NAZIANZENE, S. CHRISOSTOME, S. AVGVSTINE, and after them, by the Angelicall Doctor. Yet this doth not impeach the full and intire satisfaction of the Blessed; nor doth the naturall incapacitie which they find in the^selues to behold God totally, any white vexe them: yea contrariwise it doth augment their ioy and contentme^t, which hath no other of-spring then
the loue of God, a loue of friendshippe, which doth rather respect the greatnesse and glorie of the obiect beloued, then its owne interest; what a pleasing rauishment shall possesse them; to behold the most simple, onely, and incomposed simplicitie of that Diuine beautie, which they contemplate, all, though not totally, by reason of its incomprehensible infinitie? In beholding it, their desire is filled with euery good thing: And beit they see it diuersly, as we haue showen, yet are they throughly content, according to the comon similitude of a glasse wherof the least is as well filled with a litle, as the greatest with much liquor. And after the desire is saciated with the fruition of this ineffable Good, with what an excesse of ioy are they taken, to know, that this adorable Deitie hath an infinite compainie of other graces and perfections, still
remayning to be seene and relished, which are not totally comprehe^ded nor knowen, saue onely by himselfe. Man doth then rayse himselfe aboue himselfe; and liftes vp his heart. But God, greater then all hearts, doth yet rise higher, nor can he be enco^pased by any other then himselfe in his full extent. O how rauishing and admirable is that they behold! And how good cause haue they to sing with the Angells the three Sanctuses to so dreadfull a Maiestie, in so high a strayne, that the Gates of Heauen shall tremble at it; and to pronounce: Thou art great and exceeding laudable o Lord; and who can worthily enough sing thy excelle^ces in thy sacred Citie, in thy holy mountaines? Though all creatures should ouerset themselues, yea melt away in ioy and admiration, yet shall they neuer arriue at the least of thyne infinite excelle^cies.
Hence it is that the HYMNE of silence is the best suiting praise, that can be offered vnto thee, in thy Heauenly Sion. Yet o God, how much more admirable is that which those soules doe not discouer in thee, since it surpasseth all created vnderstandings, euen strengthened with the light of Glorie? And to what a violent paine would the desire of knowing thee totally, and louing thee deseruedly, that is infinitly, put them vnto, if thy sweete and fatherly prouide^ce, (least the puritie of their inspeakable ioyes might be stayned with the mixture of any discontent) did not change the knowledge they haue, that they cannot totally comprehend and imbrace thee, into a soueraigne delight, that the glorious Obiect of their view and loue, is so immense, that it cannot be perfectly and intirely knowen and beloued, but by thy selfe, by reason of the Diuine
infinitie of thyne infinite Diuinitie. Meane while they draw from this great ALL, as from an vndraynable fountaine, all their comon and particular delightes, diuersely glorious, according to the diuersitie of the light of Glorie which is distributed vnto them, wherby they see him more or lesse, with proportion to their Charitie and merit. We haue some darke resemblance of this here below in the vse of our Senses. For is it not true that the same Picture is diuersely beholden, according to the varietie of their opinions and skill that doe behold it? Is not a daintie musike diuersely receaued into the eare of the hearer, according as their organes are disposed, and they are attentiue vnto it? And to conclude this discourse with an excellent similitude: The miraculous MANNA which pleased euery palate, was doubtlesse of a diuerse relish to the
Israelite, yet neuer any of them, nor ioyntly all of them felt euer all the tastes with which God did endow that heauenly and Angelicall bread. We may say the same of the sight of God, the highest point of eternall Glorie: a sight which S. IOHN in his Reuelations tearmes a hidden Manna, for the reasons which we will reserue for that stroke wherin we set out the pleasures of the Will.


Whether the beatified vnderstanding sees all in God.
L.
BEfore I come to the Beatitude of the will, I desire to show, Athanasia, whether, as the vnderstanding enlightened with the light of Glorie sees God all; so it sees all in God. We cannot haue an answere to this difficultie from a better mouth then from the ORACLE
of the Schoole the Angelicall Doctor, who teacheth vs, that like as no created vnderstanding can totally comprehend God; so consequently can it not see in God all that he doth, or is able to doe, that being reserued to God alone, who is of an infinite capacitie, or rather infinitie it selfe. Marrie it shall see more or lesse, according to the measure of the light of Glorie by which it is sustayned. He shall see in God all that he shall see, yet shall he not for all that, see all which God seeth. Not because all that which God seeth is not visible in himselfe, but in regard of the created vnderstandings limitation, whence it cannot comprehend an illimited thing. Nor is it to the pourpose to affirme, that the Blessed, who shall resemble the Angells, shall see like those heauenly spirits in the WORD (the true Mirrour without all Spot the likenesse of his Fathers
Goodnes, and figure of his substance; the splendour and candour of his light, being God of God, and light of light.) All things as in a Mirrour, being a thing comonly knowen, that he that sees a Mirrour, sees all things represented therin. For to make that obiection vanish like smoake, we need onely to reply, that it is true indeed when we speake of a Mirrour which is comprehe^ded by the eye. But this Mirrour of the WORD and the Diuinitie, being incomprehensible, how can it be imagined, that a finit and limited vnderstanding can comprehe^d that which is incomprehensible? God therfore doth onely communicate himselfe infinitly vnto himselfe, by reason of the infinit capacitie which he hath to giue and receaue such a communication: To creatures it is sufficient that he communicate himselfe, with proportion to their sufficiencie
to receaue him. For how can they iustly desire any more, after they be replenished with the fulnesse of God so far forth as their capacitie and abilitie can admitt? But let vs consider further, Athanasia, how excellent this sight of things in God shall be, by the manner of seeing, which shall be much more perfect then though they were seene in themselues, in their nature and proprieties, or els by their species and representation. For the beatified vnderstanding being vnited vnto God, and beholding the verie Diuine Essence without species or image, shall by consequence see all the creatures in this Diuine Essence, without Species or representations, in a far more compleate and high manner, then though they were seene in themselues, because they shall see them in the same manner they see God, whose proper Essence shall supplie
the Species of things, all which it contaynes in a most eminent manner. O incomparable glorie of the blessed vnderstanding, since thou shalt see the Esse^ce of God, (without species, without mediation, face to face) and in it, all things! Thou shalt be blessed, like vnto God, and shalt enioy the felicitie which God himselfe enioyeth, sith his Beatitude consisteth in the louing contemplation of his owne Essence.


The pleasures of the Will.
LI.
ALthough the aduantages of the vnderstanding be such as we haue set them out in the preceedent stroke, yet is the Will alwayes his Mistrisse, and all his labours and actions are directed to her. He is her Page, her Torchbearer, her Forerunner; it is he, that
discouers the GOOD, and proposeth it to the Will to be loued, who after she hath knowen it, she imbraceth it. For according to the Philosophers Axiome. The will is not carried to an obiect it knowes not. Now this Diuine Essence seene without the mediation of Species by the vnderstanding, being the essentiall and infinite Goodnes, whence all that is good amongst creatures doth flow, the will shall so closely, attentiuely and inuariably vnite her selfe vnto it, that no creature ether in Heauen or earth shall euer be strong enough to separate her from this Charitie so perfect and accomplished. And out of this inseparable vnion of the will with the Soueraigne Good, her Rest and Center, a fountaine of water of life runing to Eternitie, shall spring vp in the soule, and thence shall flow a floode of continuall ioyes and delightes; so shall they be absorpt in
the pleasures of our Lord, and as it were drunke vp in the Abisses of Diuine sweetnesses. And if the wiseman say, that all good things did accompainie wisdome in him, how much rather may the blessed soule pronounce the same in the possession of the Diuine wisdome, and that eternall Kingdome, which in the Ghospell we are exhorted to search after, with promisse, that in possessing of it, all good shall befall vs: For being accompained with a compleate Charitie, Charitie the bond of perfection, by a necessarie sequall she shall be attended by all the Vertues, whose actes she shall exercise with an incredible delight and facilitie. And this louing fruition of God by the Will, is that hidden Manna, wherof mention is made in the Apocalipse, reserued for the victorious inhabitants of the triumphant Hierusalem. For as the Manna of the
Wildernes did conteyne in it selfe all kind of sauours: so this vnion of the Will with the essentiall Goodnes of God, doth co^prise all the fauours heart can wish, in a most eminent^ ma^ner. There is nothing in the pleasures, honours, and riches of created things, which is worthy to be compared to this treasure. The Manna was a celestiall Foode, taking its name from the admiration of those who tasted it; for the word imports What is this? and was spoken by the Israelites, when they saw it fall from Heauen. And this gust of the will can be no otherwise exprest, but by rapture: so far doth it outstripe all humane capacitie. It is called a hidden Manna, for that being vnknowen to the world, it is onely knowen of such as doe experie^ce its sweetnesse, inconceaueable sweetnesse; which caused the Kingly Prophete to cry out, o Lord how great
is the multitude of the sweetnesse which thou hast treasured vp for those that walke in thy feare. O God! might I dare to expresse in this poore Draught the vnspeakeable contentme^t of the Will in her vnion and application to the Goodnes of the Diuine Essence, to the Diuinitie of the esse^tiall Goodnes? O powrefull Vertue of Faith, to what a high point of light dost thou rayse our soules in this vaile of darknesse? Yes, Athanasia, euen as the vndersta^ding shall be applied to the Prime Truth, which is God himselfe; so shall the beatified will be inseparably ioyned to the Essence of the Diuine Goodnes, and shall be eternally fedd and sustayned with God's owne substance: in some sort; as a tender child, who hangs at his mothers breaste, is nourished with the substance of the mothers milke. And thus shall be accomplished that of
the Prophete, I will leade her into a place a part, and will speake vnto her heart: and I will giue her the milke of my dugges. Reioyce Hierusalem with alacritie, that thou maist be filled with the milke of consolation, and that thou maist sucke and take delight in the full aboundance of his glorie, thou shalt be carried to the pappes, and thou shalt be dandled and lulled vpon the knee. O Church Militant in earth, poore bleare-dyed LIA with weeping in this vally of teares, not discouering the Sunne which shines in the Triumphant, be comforted, in that thou art not forsaken or abandoned of thy IACOB: no, for he is with thee to the worlds end. Thou enioyest his imbracements, which makes thee fruitefull, in the feaste of his grace, to wit, the most holy Eucharist: for in this banquet, thou art fed with the substance of his flesh and blood, applyed to the
substance of his children, to thend they may learne by this wonderfull misterie, that in the perpetuall feaste of Glorie, he will in like manner applie vnto the Essence of their soules, his Diuine Essence, and that there, they shall taste and see how sweet he is. True it is, that here below that Diuine humanitie is vayled with Sacramentall species, but aboue in the banquet of the Lambs marriage all shall be discouered; Enigma's shall cease; and the vnderstanding and will shall see and taste without image and species the beautie of the Diuine Goodnes; the goodnes of the faire Diuinitie. Then, as S. AVGVSTINE saith, the prize and crowne of vertue, shall be God himselfe, who gaue the vertue. Who shall be seene aboue of the Blessed without end, loued without distaste, praysed without intermission. So that this recompence is the greatest that can
be, since it is nether Heauen nor Earth, nor any other creature, but the very Creatour and Lord of all. Who though most-one and most simple, yet doth he comprehend in himselfe in an infinite eminencie, all the perfections of all things. Whe^ce it comes, that the Blessed shall in him alone behold and enioy all things, according to each ones measure of Glorie. And as creatures are in some sort here below, the mirrour, wherin is seene the beautie of the Creatour; so aboue, God shall be the Mirrour wherin the creatures shall be seene much more perfectly then in them selues. But in fine, Athanasia, the toppe of the felicitie of the beatified will shall be placed in her perfect loue, the accomplishme^t of her true end, and in that inuariable and immutable coniunction, with her rauishing Obiect the Soueraigne Good, which will make
her wholy Diuine, wholy transformed into the Will of God, and to speake with the Contemplatiues, wholy deified.


The felicitie of the inferiour portion of the soule.
LII.
LEt vs now descend; Athanasia, to the lowest degree of the soule, and lets giue a light touch of her Beatitude. Who is able to comprehend what goodly and rauishing Idea's, the three faculties of the soule shall make resulte in the imagination; and how withall, this light and gliding Mercurie shall be stayed in God, whose presence shall arrest all the motions of this stirring, vnquiete, and flitting facultie. And if we make a step lower into the appetitiue part, where the Concupiscible and Irascible passions are lodged,
motions which doe stirre vp such tormoyles, tempests, and disorders in our inward house in this life; who would be able to expresse the heauenly order, and goodly gouernme^t that Reason, which then shall be, their absolute Mistrisse and Gouernant, shall establish amongst them? And what a sure and happie Peace shall raigne amongst those people, who whileome were so subiect to rebellion, while they sat in the darknes of this life, and in the region of the shadowe of death. Then there will be no Loue but of God, in God, and for God: no Hatred, but of that which shall be contrarie to this soueraigne Loue. No more desire but that which doth accompainie the fruition of the Diuine obiect, which is continually to enioy, and eternally to behold that glorious face which the Angells continually desire to behold, albeit they continually behold it. There shall
be no more auersion or flight, but from that which shall be contrarie to that sacred desire: or rather, there will be no more auersion at all, because this passion presupposing euil, it shall haue no Obiect in this place of felicitie, where infelicitie is not permitted entrance. Ioy shall be perpetuall, and alwayes in our Lord, since this sacred Residence is called the ioy of our Lord: nor ca^ the scourge of sorrow approach his Tabernacles of confidence and ioy, far other then those which S. PETER wished vpon the Mont-Thabor. Anger is a monster banished from this Pallace of Loue. Euen Hope it selfe shall vanish in the possession of that, which with patience was expected. Despaire throwen headlong into Hell for euer, shall not recouer it selfe from that fall, to inhabite this place of delight. Chaste Feare full of respect, and wholy canded in Loue,
shall remayne in Beatitude for euer and euer. And with what courages shall not those valiant Champions be enriched, who are there adorned with so many crownes, hauing alreadie past their co^bats, and lawfully fought. But to speake in a more noble and high strayne of those motions, which we tearme passions here below, because we suffer by their mutinie, and reuoults, we should rather say that they shall be happily changed into reasonable affections; and that humane reason being vnited to the prime and soueraigne, that is, the Diuine Reason, shall make vse of all those faculties for the seruice and glorie of the Creatour, applying all to his honour and praise, and making them in a glorious manner waite vpon CHARITIE, whose proper Empire is to rule soueraignely ouer reasonable affections, and to bestow vpon them an honorable imployment;
So shall the soule, as the Psalmist sings, and all her interiour faculties blisse God.


Of the dowries of the beatified soule.
LIII.
I Haue espoused thee in Faith, I haue espoused thee for euer, said God to a faithfull soule by one of his Prophetes. Whence you see, Athanasia, that herebelow, the betrothing is as it were passed betweene God and the soule, when she adheares to him by a liuely Faith, that is, quickned with loue and Charitie: but that the consummation of the marriage, which is followed with an indissoluble knot, is performed onely in the Blessed Eternitie. These two sortes of espousalls are figured by the eare-letters, and bracelets with which ABRAHAM presented REBECCA by the hands of ELIEZER for the pledges
of their marriage. For eare-rings are symboles of Faith, which doth insinuate it selfe by the eare, where the word of God entereth: and bracelets are tokens of loue, whose true proofe is the worke saith S. GREGORIE: and is not the worke signified by the arme and hand, the principall instruments of operation? Now in euery well-ordered marriage, the Bride receaues some dowrie of the Bridegroome, whervpon in this great Sacrament of IESVS CHRIST and his Church and the faithfull Soule, which is a member of this Church the misticall body of our Sauiour, the Doctors doe assigne dowries to the soule which enters into Glorie, according to that doctrine of ISAIE; our Lord hath clothed me with garments of saluation, and hath adorned me with a chayne as his Spouse: And that of S. IOHN in his Apocalipse, who compares the
triumphant Hierusalem to a Bride well deckt, being so adorned by her spouse. And touching those dowries in particular, they reduce them to three heades, conformably to the three powres of the Soule, and to the three Diuine vertues, which God infuseth herebelow into the hearts of the faithfull, Faith, Hope, and Charitie. For they say, that the Memorie is endowed with the possession of God, which doth referre to Hope: The vnderstanding with vision or knowledge, in reward of Faith: and the Will with the Diuine Fruition, in recompence of Charitie. This is the triple band, which in Heauen shall inseparably tye vs to God, a heauenly band which can neuer be broken!



Touching the qualities of the glorified bodies.
LIV.
LEt's now make a passage, Athanasia, from the interiour to the exteriour: from the felicitie of the Soule, to that of the body: and let vs say, that to those dowries, which I haue deciphered in the former stroke, admirable qualities shall be adioyned, which without distroying the beeing of the bodie, shall worke wonderfull changes, and make them far more noble then they are in this mortall life. We shall all rise againe, saith the Apostle, that is, as well the Elect as the Reprobate, but all shall not experience this happie change: for the bodies of the da^ned shall remayne passible, heauie, grosse, and darke; but the bodies of the Blessed shall become impassible,
subtile, light, and resplendant. And to these foure qualities it is, that the Doctors haue reduced the dowries of the glorious bodies. Impassibilitie is a qualitie which shall make the body of an incorruptible temper, not obnoxious to change, exempt from hungar, thrist, cold, heate, greife, infirmitie, and from euery thing that can subiect vs to death, or paine. Glorified bodies cannot burne nor suffer in the fire, nor be drowned in the water. In a word, nor can the tooth of Tyme, nor any other force distroye them. They shall enioy a continuall youth, like to a flowre that cannot fade; a vigorous health, against which sicknesse can attempt nothing, a qualitie of the heauenly bodies that suffer no alteratio^. Which made the Apostle say, that that which was sowen in corruption (he meanes the corps layed in the graue) shall ryse incorruptible, and that which is
mortall shall put-on immortalitie. And againe, the dead shall rise to incorruption. The second dowrie is subtiltie, which shall indewe the body, as it were, with a spirituall qualitie. I doe not say that it shall become spirit, for that is the errour of some auncient Heretikes refuted by S. AVGVSTINE in his bookes of the Citie of God: nor yet, that the glorious body shall be made aire, an Heresie which S. GREGORIE in his Morales ascribes to EVTICHIVS Bishope of Constantinople, but I say, its subtiliti^ shall be so great, that it shall passe through another body, as through Heauen and earth, which the Maisters tearme Penetration of dimensions. And of this dowrie is vnderstoode that of the Apostle, this sensible body shall rise againe spirituall, (that is, resembling the spirit in sundrie things) yet in such a spiritualitie, as shall not depriue it of its palpabilitie, according
to that saying of our Sauiour to his disciples after his resurrection: touch and see, a spirit hath nether flesh nor bones, as you see me haue. And the same Sauiour did shew the subtiltie of his glorious body, while he issued out of his Tombe not opening it, and entred into the Hall where the Apostles were, the gates being shutt. The third qualitie shall be an incredible Agilitie, and such as S. AVGVSTINE teacheth, that the body shall be where the Spirit desireth, not that this motion, saith S. THOMAS, is performed in an instant, and without a meane, but that the swiftnes of the passage, shall be, in a sort, imperceptible, and like to that of fire or lightning, as saith the wiseman. For the rest, saith ISAIE, they run without labour, and trauell as far as they list, without being wearie at all, because this body sowen in infirmitie, shall rise againe, saith the Apostle, in such
vigour, (a vigour which S. THOMAS takes for Agilitie, or Mobilitie) that it shall be indefatigable, and shall performe in a smale tyme, an incredible iorney. The fourth and most noble dowrie shall be Brightnes, of which it is said in S. MATHEW, that the Iust shall shine like the Sunne in the Kingdome of their heauenly Father: and againe, that they should flie like sparkes, as it is in the wiseman. And S. PAVLE writing to the Corinthians, assures them, that that which is sowen in infirmitie shall rise vp in glorie, that is, in brightnes, according to S. THOMAS his interpretation, grounding vpon the same Apostle, who saith presently after, as one starre differs from another in brightnes, so shall the glorious bodies differre after their resurrection. And the same Apostle speaking to the Philippians tells the^, that our Lord will reforme the body
of our humilitie, and will co^forme it to his brightnes, a brightnes wherof he gaue a proofe in his Transfiguration vpon the Mount-Thabor; of his Agilitie by walking vpon the waters; of his subtiltie in his birth; and of his impassibilitie escapeing often tymes, without hurt, out of the hands of the Iewes, who one while would stone him, at another tyme would throw him headlo^g downe, while as yet the tyme of his suffering death for our sake, was not arriued.


The pleasure of the Senses.
LV.
THe glorious bodie being in this sort, as it were transformed by the foure qualities which I haue touched in the former stroke. O, Athanasia, iudge you how exquisite the pleasures of
the senses shall be, which they shall enioy in Organes so perfectly well disposed. It is a delightfull question in Diuinitie, to know, whether the dowrie of impassibilitie shall exclude the act of the senses, which S. THOMAS deneyes, by no lesse solide then subtile arguments, and shewes contrariwise, that the perfection of those qualities shall render the pleasures of the Senses more pure, and their delightes more excelle^t. He seemes to make some exception of the Se^se of tasteing, for that the Kingdome of Heauen being nether meate nor drinke, but ioy and Peace in the Holy Ghost, and the beatified body sta^ding in no neede of foode to sustaine it, he thinkes that this Sense made to relish meates, remaynes vnprofitable; and he would rather attribute vnto it, a delicious humiditie vpon the tongue, which makes it feele the taste of a hidden Manna; then to
beleeue, that this facultie should be there without its peculiar delight. And it is not without reason, that Beatitude is compared in the Scripture to a great feaste, and that the Sacred Canticles mention so many sweetes, honie combes, daintie and inebriating wines; and that the heauenly Spouse inuites those to drinke and eate who are called, inuited and admitted to his eternall marriages. For though we cannot fully conceaue in this life what the endlesse delightes shall be which God hath in his right hand to bestow vpon his Fauorites: yet doth Faith teach vs, that there are secretes lockt vp in the treasures of his wisdome, to doe that which we cannot comprehend. Our Lord, saith ISAIE, will make a solemne banquet in his holy mountaine for all natio^s, replenished with all sortes of good things, and delicate meates, a banquet far other then that of ASSVERVS,
which the scripture deliuers in such pompe, in the booke of ESTER. O how happie shall he be, saith the Holy Euangelist, who shall eate bread in the Kingdome of Heauen; and shall be inuited to the marriage of the lambe. Behold, saith the Sauiour of our soules, what I haue prepared for you in the Kingdome which my Father hath giuen me, that you may eate and drinke at my table. And S. LVKE speaking of this Eternall banquet: Amen I say vnto you, saith he, the Sonne of man shall girt himselfe, and shall make his Elect, sit at his table, and he will serue them according to their rancke. And the Psalmist: the desire of the Elect, that is, their appetite, shall be replenished with good things; and the same speaking of himselfe, I shall not be saciated, saith he, till the glorie of our Lord shall appeare vnto me. Could the delightes of the taste
be more plainely set out? By how much the eye passeth the other Senses in dignitie, by so much its delightes shall be more worthy of co^sideration. O God what rauishing spectacles shall they behold, and how all the worlds rarities shall shew vile and obscure in regard of the wonderous splendour of the heauenly Hierusalem! How shall the diuersitie of the glorious bodies adorned with so many recommendable qualities, rauish them! But leauing the Angells and Saintes of the lower rankes, o blessed eyes, what ioy shall you not feele, in the vision of that glorious visage of IESVS CHRIST? which the Angells haue beholden for so many ages, and shall behold for euer and euer, so far from being wearied of it, that they shall be delightfully saciated with it. O Deified humanitie, the soueraigne glorie and felicitie of the
eyes that behold thee! o resplendant Sunne of the Easte, o starre the light of the world! o Lambe who art the Lampe of the eternall Sion! how happie are they, who, in these Tabernackles of assurance, shall incessantly behold thee vpon the Diuine Thabor; and shall adore thee like the Elders of the Apocalipse; before the Throne of thy Maiestie in the highest! IOB beholding in spirit this happie Abode, rauished with content, said, I know that my Redeemour liues, and that at the last day I shall rise againe, and shall issue out of the ground, being a new againe clad with the same skinne, with which now I am inuironed, and that in myne owne flesh I shall see my God, my Redeemour, whom with myne owne eyes I shall behold and with no others, and this hope layed vp in my bosome, is my sweetest consolation. O Goodly Paradice! it is in thee, that the eares shall heare those
secrete words, which S. PAVLE heard in his Rapture, and which he durst not speake againe. o blessed eares! it is in this place that you shall heare the words of spirit and life, yea words of spirit and life euerlasting. o Saintes! then shall you say, we will harken what our Lord shall say vnto vs; yes, speake Lord, for thy seruants are attentiue. And if the Queene of Saba did repute Salomon's courtiers happie, because they dayly heard the discourses of wisdome, which issued from his mouth; what shall it be to heare him, who is incomparably more then SALOMON, and who is wisdome it selfe? o how delightfull shall the discourses of Saintes be; how delicious their song and harmonious musicke! nay the Saintes dance for ioy in this holy place, and God's prayses doe continually resound in their mouthes. Be hust heauenly Musicians, who so highly
sing the Glorie of God. Silence ye warbling birds. Consorts of the world be still, while the Musicians of heauen tune their instruments, and play of their Harpes, till they entone with one consent of hearts and voices the Song of the Lambe. The Song alwayes new, of him, who alone workes wonders.


A continuation of the precede^t subiect.
LVI.
BVt doe you not perceaue, Athanasia, the sweete charme of all the parfumers odoriferous Sentes? By meanes of those which you shall find in the Ca^ticles, rayse vp your mynd, I beseech you, to those delightfull Sweetes wherwith the Saints doe embalme the Throne of the Lambe, the odour of whose garments surpasse all aromaticall spices. Those, who in this
world by their examplaire vertues haue bene a good odour in IESVS CHRIST, and an odour of life to life, shall be then so sweetly parfumed, that our Sauiour will say vnto them, as ISAAC did to IACOB; behold the odour of my children, like vnto that of a florishing feild, and heaped with benedictions. It shall not be enough for the sense of touching to be exe^pt from paine, by the priuiledge of impassibilitie, but further, though it be the grossest of all the Senses, yet, inriched with the dowrie of subtiltie, Agilitie, and brightnesse, it shall haue also its particular delightes, marrie such, as are innocent (for, as is in the sacred Text, there shall be no more marriages, but euery one shall be as the Angells of God) and as pure as the very sunne-beames, although it be inuironed on euery side with a torrent of pleasures, which shall penetrate men in more places, then they
haue pores in their bodie. I omit the glorious m^arkes, and particular contentme^ts of the bodies which might haue suffered paines, and mortified themselues for the loue of God; for as sinners shall be tormented according to their lawlesse pleasures; so shall the Elect be rewarded according to their sufferances. For which cause our Sauiour said: you are happie when you are persecuted, because your reward shall be plentifull in heauen. For the loue of you, said the Psalmist^; speaking for the Saintes, we haue bene mortified, and led like sheepe to slaughter. But o Lord, saith the same, how thy friendes haue bene afflicted, and, as the vulgaire translation hath, honored; how their principalitie, that is, their Glorie, was confirmed. And againe, according to the multitude of their greeues, consolations abounded in their Hearts. O my wretched body
what ought we not to endure herebelow, to arriue at the t^oppe of such felicitie? whither the^ Saintes are come through fire, wheeles, gibbets, swords, haire-shirts, disciplines, austerities: and whither the King of Saints entred by suffera^nces. O miserable bodie! too delicate a member to liue vnder a Heade crowned with thornes, and wholy couered with blood. Tell me accursed carcasse* and victime of death, what priuiledge thou pretendst, that thou darst presume by a manifest i^iustice, wallowing in soft lux and delicacies, to enter into a Kingdome, all whose gates are made with Crosses; in a Paradice, where none enters, that is not pearced with the fir^e sword of a louing mortification? Heare this doome, or rather this thunder clapp, o my body, and thou o my soule, If thou dost not mortifie with the spirit the actions of sensualitie, thou shalt
die? marrie if thou mortifiest them, thou shalt liue. And againe, mortifie your me^bers which are vpon earth, and carrie still in your body the mortification of IESVS CHRIST; so shall you be as dead, but to th'end you may liue eternally.


Of the Aureola.
LVII.
BEsides the essentiall Glorie which the Blessed shall enioy, Athanasia, in the sight of the Soueraigne well-beloued, in the loue of the Soueraigne well-seene, the Diuines doe note certaine accidentall ones, and as it were accessorie to the prime and principall, which they haue named Aureolas, grounding vpon a passage of Exodus, where there is command giuen to make a litle crowne called Aureola ouer the Arke, bisides the crowne of gold
with which it was to be wholy inuironed. Now this Aureola doth chiefely reside in the soule, albeit by a certaine rebounding (saith S. THOMAS, as also DENIS THE CARTHVSIAN) and ouerswelling, it breakes out, and spreads it selfe ouer all the bodie, and doth euen outwardly appeare with a certaine peculiar grace. And if Essentiall Glorie be different, according to the diuers degrees of Charitie and merite, this accidentall, of which we speake, shall be varied, following the varietie of labours and victories. For as there is diuision of graces, so is there of rewards to. Ordinarily these Aureolae are diuided into three kindes; wherof one is attributed to MARTYRES, who haue conquered the world: the second to VIRGINES, who haue surmounted sensualitie: the third to DOCTORS, who by their learning haue defeated the
Artes and errours of the Prince of darknesse. And if these Aureolae be compared together, the comon consent giues the first rancke and preeminencie to Martyrdome: for there is no greater charitie, then to giue ones life for that which he loues. Neuer durst any, saith S. AVGVSTINE, preferre Virginitie before Martyrdome, Chastitie being but a lent martyrdome, wheras to die in torments, is a violent one. A second is giuen to virgines, who follow the Lambe where euer he goes, clothed in white stoles. The third to Doctors, who were the salte of the earth, the light of the world, and the Lampes of Israel. And when I say the Aureola shall be giue^ vnto Doctors, I nether vnderstand the learned, nor those that shall onely haue taken the degree of Doctor ship in earth, and buried their Talent, and hid their Lampe vnder the Bushall: For such Doctors
shall enioy in Heauen the simple guife of Charitie onely, a thing common with the rest of the Elect; for as DANIEL saith; they shall be bright as the Firmament. But such, as shall instruct others in the way of saluation and rightuousnes, shall sparkle and shine as glorious strarrs in perpetuall Eternities. Those then it is, that haue taught and communicated to the ignorant sound and wholsome doctrine, who shall carrie away the Aureola of Doctors. For as he is not crowned who hath onely the abilitie and strength to fight and vanquish, but he that in effect doth fight and ouercome the enemy, according to that: none shall be crowned, but such as haue lawfully fought: so those onely that had knowledge, and made others participant of it, shall partake of the Aureola of Doctors, according to that of the Ghospell, he that shall teach and doe what is good, shall
be called great in the Kingdome of Heauen, Some vnderstand those words of the Apocalipse of this Aureola: I will bestow on him that shall ouercome, a hidden Manna, and a white stone wherin shall be grauen a new name, which none shall know but he that receaues it: and that of ISAIE, speaking of the Continent vnder the name of Eunukes: I will giue them a Mansion within the compasse of the walls of my house, and an excellent name amongst the childre^ of men. As then, here below in earth, men are ordinarily distinguished by their clothes: so shall those three bands haue some particular signe or marke, which shall make them notable amongst the rest of the Blessed.



The Blessed societie of the Elect.
LVIII.
ANd if an auncient Philosopher, Athanasia, following comon sense, said, that felicitie is not full and accomplished without societie, what compainie is comparable to that, which the Blessed inioy in Glorie? Though God be sole and one in Essence, yet hath he societie in the distinctions of persons, and thence is not solitarie in his Beatitude. What shall it be to behold the Societie of the three Diuine persons vnited together in the vnitie of their beeing? yea euen to be vnited to this high Societie, in the band of Charitie, which is that of perfection! what shall it be to be associated to the humanitie of IESVS CHRIST, our brother, according to Flesh, as he was Sonne of man,
which for our sake he tooke vpon him: whence we are made children of God; and if children, heires; and if heires of God, coheires of IESVS CHRIST in the inheritance of Glorie. O how happie shall they be who are inrowled into the holy FELLOWSHIPE of IESVS CHRIST, and made partaker of his heauenly and Diuine conuersation? And if it be written, that euen in this world, he that is in Charitie, remaynes in God, and God in him; and that he that keepes the Commandements, is made the Tabernacle, and lodginge, of the three persons of the Sacred TRINITIE: what are we to say of the state of consummated Grace, which is Glorie, where Charitie is compleate? O Diuine Societie! And if after the Diuinitie and humanitie of our Sauiour, we turne the ey of our consideration vpon the admirable beautie of her who is the holy
of Holyes, yea the MOTHER of the holy of Holyes; and who next vnto God, to whom is due the worshipe of Latria, we honour with Hyperdulia, what could be imagined more rauishing, since she is the mother of that verie Sonne, who was eternally begotte^ in the splendour of Saintes, in the breast of the eternall Father? were it not a spareing speach, to attire her with the Sunne; to make the Moone her footstoole, and starrs her crowne? yes verily, since her Sonne and her God, are her great crowne, and incomparable ioy, according to that of the wiseman: a vertuous Sonne is the crowne and ioy of his Father and Mother, And from this qualitie of MOTHER OF GOD, which is in some sorte infinite, there rebou^ds in her such an abundance of grace, that she is not onely inuested with them, but ouer-inuested; not onely full, but ouer-heaped, so that next to
the humanitie of thy adorable So^ne, who was conceaued by the Holy Ghost of her pure blood, there is no created obiect in Heauen that dare approach her beautie. It was written of ESTER that she was extreamely faire, incredibly gracefull, meruellously amiable, and gracious in the eyes of euery one. But nothing below was powerfull enough to gaine the Heart of the Heauenly ASSVERVS, saue onely the Diuine Maries perfections. O vessell of Election, choyce peece of the massiue gold of faire and pure dilection, beset with all the precious stones of vertues; what a ioy shall it be to the Elect, thy litle children, sith thou art the mother of their Sauiour and Father, to liue eternally in thy happie compaignie? What sense of obligation shall they testifie vnto thee, who by thy powrefull prayers receaued so many sundry graces in
earth? Yea that which is the toppe of all graces, their admittance into the Pallace of immortalitie? what a delight shall it be to be associated to the troopes of Angells, whose conuersation is intirely sweete and deuoyd of bitternesses, and to be made partakers of their splendour and beautie, yea to become like to them, according as it is written; the Elect shall be as the Angells of God; which is easie to be beleeued, since that in some sort, they shall be made like vnto God, when they shall see him face to face, and such as he is. What a glorie shall it be to be made an eternall Citizen of that delightfull Hierusalem, built as a Citie; to be participant of the same freedome which the Saintes of God enioy, without all feare of falling from it, or of being euer banished from that Residence of permane^t and eternall abode. And if in the tyme of the
Triumphant Rome, it was reputed so greate a priuiledge to be made free Denisan of that famous Citie, as then LADY CONQVERESSE of a great part of the world: And if while Hierusalem florished vnder SALOMON's reigne, it was so wishfull a thinge to liue there, and to haue a share in the delightes and triumphes which were there ordinarie. O heauenly Societie where God raignes in and amongst his Saintes eternally; where triumphes and pleasures are perpetuall, and that in a life that shall neuer pay tribute to death, how much more art thou to be desired?


The Excellences of this holy Societie.
LIX.
BVt let vs not conte^t our selues, Athanasia, with a generall sight of this holy compaignie,
but that we, may take more gust, and reape more fruite from this speculation, let vs walke our thoughtes amidst the particular excellences therof, and let vs waigh it, as we ought in the waightes of the Sanctuarie. If earthly Cities be esteemed for the multitude of their inhabitants, as was the great NINIVE of old; since that, ROME, CONSTANTINOPLE, and now the incomparable PARIS, who for the abundance of her riches, and the number of her inhabitants, seemes in deede, as in name, an Abridgement of Paradice: What esteeme is to be made of the numberlesse number of the heauenly Hierusalem. No, saith IOB, the number of God's Champions, vpon whom the light of his countena^ce doth shine, cannot be counted. A thousand thousand Angells, saith DANIEL, serue him, and tenne thousand millio^ assiste before his throne.
And if the first quire of Angells surpasse the number of men; and that Quire be the lest in number, as in all other qualities, how great must the number of the eight former quires needs be, if according to the opinion of S. THOMAS, followed by DENIS THE CARTHVSIAN, the number of Angells doth as much outstripe that of men, who haue bene, now are, or shall be, as heauenly bodies doe put downe the elementarie in quantitie? As for the Elect who are to succeede in the vacante Seates, and to repaire the ruines, of the Angells Apostataes, they shall be in so great abundance, that S. IOHN saith in his Reuelatio^s, that their number cannot fall vnder the lawes of Arithmetike. Counte if thou canst the starrs in the Heauens, and the sands on the Sea shoare, said our Lord of old to ABRAHAM, and know that thy posteritie shall be yet more numerous.
In what number shall the children of the God of ABRAHAM ISAAC and IACOB be, who could out of stones raise the children, of that great Patriarke, the Father of the faithfull, and beleeuers. O Lord grant that I may be enrowled in the booke of life, which shall contayne all their names, new names, which shall proceed from thy mouth; and that I may co^fesse thee, in that great Church, and triumphant assemblie; and that I may blesse the amongst that people full of grauitie. And it is an excellencie no lesse gratefull to contemplate the fine distinction of rankes in that incredible multitude, without all diuision or iealousie. For if in the Babilone of the Reprobate, there be a horrible confusion and disorder: in this Hierusalem, Mother of the Elect, there is a well gouerned Order by the Diuine wisdome, a thousand tymes fairer, then that
which we dayly behold in the compositio^ of this great vniuerse. There are many Mansions in my Fathers house, saith our Sauiour CHRIST. The Angells are diuided therin, into three principale Hierarchies, and each of these Hierarchies into three orders, which make vp nine Quires of all those heauenly Spirits. Thus are the troopes of the Armie of the God of Hostes ranged: of which it is said in the Sacred Canticle, speaking of the Spouse of the great and Heauenly SALOMON: what can you espie in the Sulamite but troopes of Soldiers well ordered, whence she is terrible as an Armie put into Battaile araye. And though the Elect, Associates of the felicitie of Angells, as being their brothers, be disposed of, according to the diuerse degrees of their Quires: yet shall they keepe their owne particular titles, by which they shall be distinguished from
one another, and knowen for such as they were in the seruice of God in his Church Militant. Thus shall the Quires of PATRIARKES, PROPHETES, APOSTLES, EVANGELISTS, MARTIRS, VIRGINS, CONFESSORS, and all the rest of the Faithfull, who euen in the world, ouercame the world, be seene in a goodly order.


Other excellencies.
LX.
THis multitude and Order is accompained with another excellencie, which consistes of an admirable vnion and correspondancie, proceeding from one and the same spirit, to witt the spirit of God, which doth animate and gouerne this heauenly companie. There, DAVID would haue iuster reason then here below, to sing. o how good and pleasant a thing it is;
to see brothers liue vnanimously together. Their accord and vnion doth resemble the oyle of the high Priest AARON, which runing downe from his heade, spredd it selfe vpon his beard, and from thence fell vpon his coller, or as others say, to the hemme of his garments. The sweete and peaceable Societie of Doues, Bees, Pismires, sheepe, and of Cities and Como^ wealthes well gouerned, is but a weake and vnworthy draught of the agreeable intelligence which passe betwixt those heauenly inhabitants. No, for all their pretentions being one, and their imployments being wholy about that one necessarie thing, of that Marie's best Parte which shall neuer be taken from her, their connection is rather to be tearmed an vnitie then an vnion, since in them is accomplished that excellent word of our Sauiours, beseeching his heauenly Father, that
such as follow and beleeue in him, should be one, as he and his eternall Father is one. So shall all their desires be filled with perfect vnitie, which is God: and all their thoughtes meeting in that vnitie, the Diuine Spouse by good reason may say to that holy assemblie, his owne misticall bodie: My Sister my Spouse, thou hast wounded, and borne away my Heart in one onely of thy heires. For as a woman that doth graspe and gather together in her hand, her long tresses, makes them all end in one onely haire: so all those elected troopes, hauing but one onely desire, which is to please God, the louing heart of this God all of fire, and which is Charitie it selfe, can it possibly but be pleased in this their preparation of mynd? From this perfect vnion doth arise the excellencie of a compleate Communitie, which is the true and consummated
Co^munion of Saintes. A Communion by which each one in his owne person, doth possesse God and his Kingdome, with such peace, and so exquisite a Charitie, that not the least apprehension of any partialitie can enter into their hearts. There shall all proprietie be left, and of the contrarie side, there shall be so bountifull a communication, that those that are highest seated in glorie, are full of affection towards the lowest, and as far forth as they are able, make them participant of their abundance; and the lowest againe, shall as much reioyce in the exaltation of the highest, as in their owne; for in this perfect Communitie myne and thine shall be giuen ouer, each ones particular good belonging to all, and the goods of all, belonging to each one in particular, each one reioycing as much in an others good as in his owne, by reason of
the great Charitie which shall be infused into their hearts by the holy Ghost. Hence they are all co^tinually sett at one table, fedd with the same substance, the Diuinitie; drinking in the same cup eternall delightes; imployed in the same exercises, seruing one and the same Maister, and that, with the same spirit, who being in all, and being all in all, he vnites them all together, by vniting them all to himselfe. This sacred band of the Diuinitie, and this Charitie of God tying and vniting them together, adornes this happie Societie with another excellencie, which is that of Peace and Concord: Peace of God which passeth all vnderstanding, and which doth connect them together like vnto the graines of a Pungranade which appeare when it is cutt open, to which the holy Spouse in the Canticles co^pares the redde cheekes of the Church his
Spouse. And if the word, concord come from the vnion or agreement of heartes, how should not they be vnited who haue one onely heart, and that quickned with one onely soule, all their hearts being set on God their onely Treasure, and their adhering to that onely principle of all Good, making them one verie spirit with God? As concerning the Peace which followes this Co^cord, as the beames the Sunne, it is the very name of this higher Hierusale^, which signifies VISION OF PEACE, and of which it is written, that it is bounded with peace. And in ISAIE, that God doth visite it in peace, and in peace which can neuer be changed, or troubled with any dissention, because Gods absolute comma^de shall find an absolute submission in all their hearts. In that heauenly Citie, saith S. AVGVSTINE, CHARITIE is the Soueraigne LAW: TRVTH the
QVEENE; PEACE the FELICITIE; ETERNITIE the LIFE therof. There; shall be a true peace, and such an one, as shall neuer be trauersed by any: a peace which passeth all delight. From that Peace springs a serenitie of mynd, a tra^quillitie of heart, a band of Loue, a communication of Charitie, and a rest in God which can neuer be changed. So speaks that Great Doctor, of that eternall Peace, which the world nether giues, nor indeed knowes.


A continuation of the excellencies.
LXI.
BVt, Athanasia, should I be able to conceale the excellencie of the beautie of that holy compaignie? o, cryes out the wiseman, how beautifull is the chaste and faire generation, truely, the memorie therof shall be immortall before God
and ma^. If he affirmed this of earthly families who liue in honour, what may be said of the generation of the Blessed which shall be crowned with eternall benedictions? How should the Angells and Elect choose but be faire, since their soules shall be decked with all the ornaments of vertues, and their bodies inriched with the glorious qualities which before we haue declared. There can be no stayne vpo^ them, for nothing that is defiled, or is imperfect, can enter into this Sanctuarie of Eternitie. And if MARDOCHEVS litle fou^taine became an Ocean of light, what beautie can the Elect want, who are vnited to the fountaine of all that faire or good is, which is he, whose essence is verie Beautie and Goodnes: And who rules in heauen by the sweete and delightfull Empire of his inco^parable beautie. No, Athanasia, if all the beauties which
doe sparkle in the whole world were gathered together (I except nether the Su^ne nor the Starrs) they would be in no sort comparable to the least grace of the Elect. Iudge then what a shine of beauties, must needs arise, from so innumerable a number of so different beauties, that some Doctors haue proceeded so far, as to say that all the Angells are of a different species. o God what numberlesse species of beauties! And as touching the diuersitie of humane sisages, it is so visible, euen in this world, that it needs no other proofe but experience. And what diuersitie of beauties shall there be in the diuers quires of Angells, and the diuers degrees of the Blessed? Let vs make an end, without ending (for who knowes not that a Draught, though neuer so perfect in the nature of a Draught, is yet but an imperfect picture) and let vs giue the
last touch to these excellencies, by that, which may be called the excellencie of Excellencies of this Blessed Societie; It is, that it shall be endowed with all the perfectio^s which grace and glorie can shewre downe vpon creatures. For sith Beatitude is a perfect collection of all kind of good things, why shall we not also affirme, that those that doe enioy it, are, by consequence, possessed of all the perfections which might in any sort perfect this felicitie? Now though soueraigne and essentiall Beatitude, as well that of this life, as of the life to come, doth not consiste in any created good, and consequently, nether in Honours, Riches, nor Pleasures, the three Classes to which are reduced euery good, be it honorable, profitable, or delightfull; but in the onely fruition of the increated Good, which is God, the essentiall fountaine of all Goodnes.
Yet as the most ridged Philosophers, haue not denyed that Glorie, Reputation, meanes, and lawfull pleasures, doe contribute to te^porall felicitie; so Diuines are not so strict as to deny that those qualities doe concurre in Heauen to the accide^tall Beatitude of the Elect. I dare therfore as boldly as truely affirme, that besides the vertues which are the beauties of the soule; and the beauties which are the vertues and graces of the bodie, which vertues shall be all together, and that in a high measure in all the Saintes, since that this heauenly Citie is thervpon called The Citie of vertues, the Citie of God, the Citie of the God of Vertues, DAVID saying, they shall goe from Vertue to Vertue to see the God of Gods in Sion. Besides the vertues, I say, the inhabitants of this glorious Citie, shall be most holy, most illustirous, most noble, and
most emine^t in all kinds of greatnes, qualities, titles, perfections, without all mixture of basenesse, abiectnesse or imperfection. Alas in this poore and miserable world, there are a thousand weaknesses and miseries mingled with the most prosperous honour in the earth, and ofte^ tymes they serue onely to make the vice and weaknesse of such as are aduanced vnto them, more appearant. The greatnesse of their fortunes serue onely to aggrauate their fault, and if their qualities doe rather moue vs to pittie then enuie, their blameworthy manners doe more moue to enuie then pittie. By how much the place is higher, whither the Ape climes, by so much he is more ridiculous, and for want of his tayle discouers all his infamie: wheras vpon the ground his deformitie doth lesse appeare. There are certaine great-ones whose scandalous proceedings,
which would be couered in the throng, if they were but of a comon condition, seeme onely to appeare in the face of the Sunne, to fasten shame vpon their foreheades, to perceaue in themselues such abiect mynds, in qualities so high. Certes, saith the great Stoicke, imagine what greatnes you please in man, it neuer passeth the limites of humanitie. Though a man be mounted vpon a Throne, his stature is no greater for all that. To take the dimensions of a Statua, one is neuer to measure the Base: nor to take the hight of a man, doe we measure him with his dignitie, of which he is often vnworthy. He that is seated in a high seate, sitts in the same manner that he would doe, being set in a lower place. Stiltes and footstooles make not a man taller, though he appeare higher. A noble out-side doth not rayse an abiect mynd; nor
doth the brightest luster of nobilitie, alwayes light vpon the greatest head. There is nothing perfect here-below; there are no roses without thornes, no wheate without cokle, nor corne without chaffe. This world is an Arke, wherin are cleane and vncleane beastes. A Parke wher goates and sheepe liue together. A nett wherin both good and bad fish are found. The rayne and Sunne doe equally fall and shine vpon the fruitfull and fruitlesse ground. But in Heauen it fares not so; nothing that is ether impure or imperfect can haue entrie there. In that faire place, saith S. BERNARD, SALOMON's wisdome will appeare follie, his knowledge ignorance; ABSALON's beautie shall be reputed there deformitie. SAMSON's force shall passe there for feablenesse. The longest tearme of life in our foreelders will appeare a death; and all the riches of all the Kings
of the earth, shall be there, verie pouertie. Say the like of all great place, honours, pleasures and conte^tments of the earth, to which we asscribe the name of good things. Verily being compared to eternall things, they shall haue the true shape of true euils, such as indeed they are, when the lawfull vse therof is turnd to abuse. And if the conuersation, and compaignie of the wise, great, vallourous, vndersta^ding, vertuous: and of personages who are illustrious, ether in regard of their qualitie or merite, is so witchingly pursued in this world; where ther is no gold without drosse, where nothing is compleate; what a blesse shall it be to a soule to perceaue her selfe associated for euer with so many Angells and Elect, all filled, by the King of immortall ages, with all desireable and imaginable perfectio^s?



A flight of the mynd towards this happie compaignie.
LXII.
BVt o my soule who will bestow vpon thee the winges of a doue to flie vp into this eternall repose? Who will grant thee the wing of an Eagle, to take a stro^g flight, and not to fall from the wing? What prosperous gale, saue that of grace, shall fill the sayles of thy desires, to make them sayle vpon the Sea of this world, to that Harbour of saluation? Why doe we not make haste, o my soule, to enter into this happie tranquilitie, amongst this holy nation, this people of acquisition, who is sett in an abu^dant peace, a rich and magnificent repose? What dost thou doe in this Land of Egipt, where thou drinkest nothing but troubled and durtie waters, leauing
the pursuite of that streame of water of life, which springs towards Eternitie? Alas! dost thou not sigh vpon the protraction of thy mortall pilgrinage? doth it not vexe thee to be so long detayned amongst the inhabitants of darknesse? Canst thou be in peace amo^gst such as hate Peace, and take a malicious pleasure in crossing thee? Goe to the^, and sleepe not betweene the two pathes of the two Eternities. Take the siluerd wings of the white doue, which are guilt in their extremities; and full of innocencie, puritie of heart and Charitie (qualities which make passage into the Tabernacles of the heauenly Hill) flie into the porche of that celestiall douecote, whether the Sacred Spouse calls thee. S. GREGORIE THE GREAT, whom PETER his DEACON did see so often accompained with a doue, which witnesseth that the holy Ghost
spoke by the mouth of that holy Pope, and flowed out of his pen, will lend thee the flight of a doue, to beare thee vp to this Societie of Saintes, by his holy words. As often as we consider the great reward which is promised vs in Heauen, how vile doth all earthly things appeare in our sight. For what tongue is able to speake, or vnderstanding to comprehend the incomparable delightes of the heauenly Hierusalem? the happinesse to be rancked amongst the Quires of Angells? to assiste before the Throne of Glorie of the Highest, and the compaignie of those blessed spirits? the felicitie which is tasted in beholding the splendour of the Diuine face? the contentment of being freed from the feare of death; and the pleasure to haue assurance of a perpetuall incorruption? What mynd is so far benum'd and frosen, as will not take heate and fealing from the desire of so great a good; and wish
speedily to be transported to the place where he hopes to enioy an endlesse ioy? But none comes without labour to so excellent a reward, whence S. PAVLE saith, that none shall be crowned but such as haue lawfully fought. And if we be taken with the greatnes of the reward, let vs not be amaysed with the paines we are to vndergoe in obtayning it. We must still goe forward, and without looking back ouer our shoulders, we must perseuere in the way. If the roughnesse of the way affright vs, let the consideration of Eternitie, our end, and contrie, encourage and comfort vs.


Another flight of mynd.
LXIII.
IF after the wings of a doue, which the successour of the So^ne of a doue, S. PETER, hath now
lent thee, thou wilt take those of the Eagle, who builds his nest in high places, but of an Eagle which is able fixedly to behold the Sonne, and who neuer stoopes from his winge, of whom can you better borrow them, o my soule, then of that greate Doctor, who holds the same ranke amongst the Fathers of the Church, that S. IOHN holds amongst the Euangelists, and who is that great Eagle which is nourished with the sappe of the Cedars of Libanus. You will easely imagine that I speake of S. AVGVSTINE. Let vs borrow then this second flight of that superlatiue witt in these no lesse affectionate, then sublime tearmes. If you were, saith he, euery day to suffer extreame torments, yea euen for a longe space to support the tortures of Hell, to behold IESVS CHRIST in his glorie, and to be admitted into the Societie of his Saintes, for so great a good, were
not all sufferances, I will not say supportable, but euen desireable? Let then the Diuel lay Ambush for vs, let him prouide temptations, let fasting breake our bodie, let our flesh be ouercharged with austerities, let labours oppresse vs, let watchings drie vs vp, let this man torment me, let that man persequute me, let me be frosen with cold, scorched with heate: let heade breake in peeces, heart ake, contena^ce waxe wa^ne; let me become wholy abiect, let my life pine away with greife, and the yeares of my life in gronings: let my bones rott, it imports not, so I find repose in the day of tribulation (he vnderstands the day of generall iudgment) and that I may rise againe amongst the Elect. For who can conceaue what shall be the glorie of the iust, how greate the ioy of Saintes, when their faces shall shine like the Sunne? when the Sauiour of the world shall number his people of acquisition, and shall range them into diuers orders in
the house of his eternall Father, re^dring to euery one according to their merits, and giuing heauenly things for terreane things, eternall for temporall. There, saith the same Doctor in auther place, the Angelicall troopes make a rauishing musike; there, is keepe a feaste of a perpetuall solemnitie with such as doe dayly arriue, departing out of their mortall pilgrimage. There are seene the Compainie of PROPHETES, the assemblie of the APOSTLES is manifested there; there the inuincible Armies of MARTIRES are discouered. There is the holy congregation of CONFESSORS: there, the Quire of venerable MVNKES, there that of DEVOVTE WOMEN who at once ouercame the weaknesse of their owne sexe, and the delightes of the world. There the young VIRGINS elder in vertue then in yeares; there are the sheepe and tender lambes, that haue escaped out of the iawes of the wolues, and from the inueigling snares of this
life, whence they doe now celebrate a perpetuall feaste, and though their glorie be different, yet is their ioy comon. There, Charitie raigneth in her full perfection: for vnto them God is all in all, whom they behold and loue without end or intermission, whom in louing they doe praise, and in praysing doe loue, and all this without wearinesse or trauaile at all. O my soule how happie thou shouldst be, if being deliuered out of the prison of this wretched body, thou mightest be thought worthy to heare the sacred songs of that celestiall harmonie, and the praises of the eternall King of that glorious Empire, sung in an admirable aire! O how accomplished should thy honour and glorie be? for so it would come to thy turne to entone that gracious Alleluia which is in the mouth of all the Elect. Let vs yet add that iert of the wing, or rather stroke of the same Fathers Pen, before we conclude these flightes and eiaculations
of mynd. From this sacred Residence all feare of pouertie is banished, all weaknes, miserie, infirmitie; none there is angerie; none doth enuie his neighbours happinesse; none stands in need of eating or drinking; There is no ambition, nor desire to be great: There is no apprehension nor of Hell nor Diuell, nor yet of death of body or soule. Contrariwise there is a life full of alacritie through the assurance they haue of immortalitie. Disorder can haue no footing there, where all things are maintayned in a constant Peace, and conserued in a perfect concord. Ioyne to all this the pleasure there is to liue in the compaignie of ANGELLS, to enioy the gratefull conuersation of all those excellent and sublime SPIRITS, and to behold the Armies of Saintes, more bright the^ the starrs of Heaue^. To contemplate the Sanctitie of PATRIARKES, the Hope of PROPHETES, the Crowne of MARTYRES,
the white and flowrie Garland of VIRGINES. And as for the SOVERAIGNE KING who keepes his Residence in the midst of that glorious people, what tongue is able to speake his praise? That bird of Paridice which ha^gs still in the aire, doth she not intimate vnto vs by her ingenious hanging, the inco^ceaueable greatnesse of that glorie?


Eternitie is the fulnesse of Beatitude.
LXIV.
BVt in fine, Athanasia, if you wilt see the garla^d and crowne of this glorie, adorned with so many bright precious stones, you must fixe your eyes vpon its Eternitie: for if all those glorious aduantages could end, amidst all those felicities, one would be accompaigned with a misfortune; which would distaste all his ioy, and would make
him resemble the great-ones of the earth, who amidst all the honours which Politike Idolatrie doth sacrifice vnto them, are co^tinually stung with the thought of death, which shall in the end mow them downe, euen like vnto other men; and burying them in dust, shall equalise their Scepters with hatchets. Kings with all their Powre escape not its dart; nor doe Giants with all their force auoyd it. Herein appeares Origen's errour, who walking vpon the wings of the wind, perished (like to that old Milo Crotoniensis) by his owne strength, while he was of opinion, that the Elect after a long residence in Heauen, should fall at length from that felicitie, like as he had held before that the paines of the da^ned should not be eternall, one absurditie drawing on another. An errour excellently well refuted by S. AVGVSTINE in his bookes
of the Citie of God, as also by the Angell of the Schoole. An errour in fine, which aimes at the ruine of the immortalitie of the soule, which is more then a bestiall blindnesse. And certes, besides that in a thousand places of holy Scriptures, the life of the Elect in Heauen is said to be eternall, and death to be defeated for euer; as also the fire which shall torment the damned, is named eternall; it is also cleare in right reason, that Beatitude, which is a sufficient good, or rather the collection of all good, would not be compleat vnlesse it did exclude all euil and miserie, especially the miserie of miseries which is death, or annihilation. For take away the perpetuitie of the life of the Blessed, and they would be afflicted with a continuall sorrow for the losse of the beloued felicitie, and a most distastefull bitternesse, would disturbe the sweetnesse of the peaceable
fruition. Adde that Beatitude cannot be imperfect on the part of the Obiect, which is God, all whose workes are perfect, and his guiftes without repentance, which he neuer reuokes but for sinne, which can neuer haue accesse to the Blessed, co^firmed in grace by Glorie; And vnchangeably vnited to God, whose nature is goodnesse, his workes mercy. And who can nether will, nor can abide iniquitie. Againe that word of our Sauiours to his Disciples, is an Oracle of infallible truth, and a promisse which shall remayne for euer; Your ioy, saith he, shall not be taken from you. God's seruants, the Elect, shall adore him in beholding his face, and they shall raigne for euer and euer, that is eternally, saith S. IOHN in his Reuelations. And S. BERNARD explicating that of the Psalmist, I will fill my friends with the length of dayes, and will shew them my SALVATION:
what is longer, saith he, then that which is eternall; what continuance more longe then that which hath no end? O how good an end is eternall life, how good is that end which is infinite! How faire is the day which hath no Sunne-setting, nor is followed out by night? and what is this day, but the eternall VERITIE, the true ETERNITIE. O Societie of the Blessed eternally true, and truely eternall, those are they onely, who may be truly said to be liuing, and enioying a life truely long in heaue^, which knowes no end; as they are truely dead, and that of a long death, who continually die in Hell, where they continually liue without tasteing the fruite of life. S. BERNARD's meditation, shall make way to S. AVCVSTINE's, touching the Eternitie of that blessed life. O life, saith he, which God hath prepared for his frie^ds,
thou art a life full of happinesse, crowned with assurance: a quiete life, and excellent life, a pure life, a chaste life, a holy life, a life that knowes no death, a life without sorrow, without labour, without greife, without vexation, without corruption, without varietie or cha^ge, a life adorned with euerie beautie, accomplished with honour: a life that is not laboured with enuie, nor subiect to anger, where Loue raignes in its perfection, and from whence feare is banished; where the day is eternall, and the hearts of all is but one; where God is seene face to face, and this vision is foode to those that behold him with an ardent affection. O how thy shineing brightnes doth delight me! and how aggreable are thy felicities to the desires of my heart! The more I consider thee, the more I loue thee, I swoone with desire in contemplating thee, yet that desire insteede of afflicting me, affords me an extreame content, and thy memorie is more sweete vnto mee then
the honie-combe. O happie life! o Empire of eternall felicitie, (where death hath no iurisdiction) which shall neuer haue end. Where the succession of tyme hath no raigne, nor vicissitude, where the day hath no night, where change can get no footing, where the victorious Champion acco^paigned with the troopes of Angells, his heade being enuironed with a crowne of glorie, incessantly sings to God the Song of the heauenly Sion. How happie shall my soule be if after her departure out of this mortall pilgrinage, she may haue the happines to see thee, and to contemplate thy beautie, thy walls, thy gates, thy Pallaces, thy places, thy noble citize^s, and thyne omnipotent King seated in his admirable Throne of Maiestie. Thy walls are built of pretious stones of an inestimable value; thy Gates are inriched with peerlesse gemmes. Thy streetes are paued with purest gold, and in them the Diuine prayses doe continually resound.
Thy houses are made of fouresquare stones, beautified with Saphires, wrought with vinebranches and grapes of gold. None enters within thy confines, who are not pure, for all that is defiled, is repulsed. The light which doth enlighten thee, is nether from Lampe nor torch, nor Sunne, Moone nor starrs, it is God alone proceeding from God, that light which doth spring from light, who is thyne eternall and vniuersall light. The King of Kings resides continually in the midst of thee, waited vpon with a numberlesse number of Courtiers and Officiers, more resplendant then the lightning, more bright then the flame. Will you yet further giue eare to the same Sainte, heare then what he saith of that liuely Eternitie, that eternall life. The wicked, saith he, shall goe into eternall fires, but the iuste into eternall felicities. That is, the eternall life which is promised vs. And wheras men take no greater content here below
then to liue, behold how life is promised them; and wheras they dread nothing so much as death, see how an Eternitie of life is proposed vnto them. What dost thou loue o man? To liue. Thou shall enioy this great benefit. What dost thou feare? To dy. Thou shalt be exempt from it. Yet is it not all, to liue long, to liue for euer, but the toppe of felicitie is to liue happie for euer. What can we add to this Oracle of truth deliuered in so good tearmes by that incomparable witt, but fruitlesse words in a subiect so fruitfull, that the abundance therof doth oppresse him that handles it?


Meanes wherby to arriue at this happie Eternitie.
LXV.
BVt we are rather, Athanasia, to search out the meanes to attaine to this great happinesse,
then to enlarge our selues vpon curiosities to know it, or loose our selues in the admiration therof, since it is written, that not all that shall say Lord Lord, shall enter into the Kingdome of Heauen, but those that doe the will of our Lord, that is, such as shall liue according to his law, and shall make force against his holy citie. Dost thou desire to enter into true life, said our Sauiour to the young man, who asked his counsell which way he was to hold, keepe the Commandements. Of all the wayes which are taught vs by the holy scripture, and the writings of Doctors to worke our saluation in feare and trembling, I will onely touch two, which, next vnto God's grace (without which we are able to doe nothing) I find verie necessarie. The Philosopher Epictetes made all his philosophicall Precepts turne vpon these two poles or pinnes.
SVSTAYNE and ABSTAYNE. I am persuaded that all morall Christianitie may turne vpon the same pinnes. The one doth teach vs to suffer difficulties, labours, and paines; the other, the perfect contempt of worldly vanities, pleasures and riches. If we haue these two winges, nothing shall be able to hinder our flight towards the blessed Eternitie, the heaue^ly Hierusalem, the mother of the liuing. Water shut vp in a narrow pipe, doth spirte vp so much the higher. The narrow way of sufferances is that which doth make spring vp in vs the fountaine of life, which doth run towards Eternitie. All the scripture cryes out this truth vnto vs, who so euer will come after me, to witt to glorie, let him take vp his Crosse, and follow me, saith our Sauiour. Happie is he who suffers tribulation, for being once tryed, he shall receaue the crowne of life,
which God hath promised to those that loue him. And who are those that loue him, but whom he doth chastise, and whom he doth clothe with the liuerie of sufferances. Because thou wast agreeable in Gods sight, it was necessarie that affliction should try thee, was it said to the good TOBIE. Are not the Iust tryed like gold in the furnace, to discouer whether they be worthy of God. What Christians can be ignorant of this decree which was written with the blood of the Lambe, vpon the threshwood of their dores. That we are to enter into the Kingdome of Heauen through many tribulations. And that all those that would liue piously in IESVS CHRIST, must endure the scourge of persecutions, to be found wheate worthy to be layed vp in the Granarie of Eternitie. For which cause S. IAMES doth exhort the faithfull to reioyce in their afflictions, knowing
that patience is the proofe of their Faith, and that the worke of Patience is perfect, that is, doth perfect him that doth it. Tribulation, saith the Apostle, worketh patience, and Patience probation, and probation Hope, and such a hope, as confoundeth not in its expectation. Though we are now for a smale tyme to be afflicted with many tribulations, yet it is, that the tryall of our Faith may appeare more precious then gold before the face of God, who according to his great mercy doth regenerate vs by a liuely hope to possesse the heaue^ly inheritance, which cannot be corrupted nor changed. Then we shall behold, we shall admire; and the plentie of good things shall dilate our heart. Then with an incredible ioy we shall be drunke vp in God our SALVATION. Then the teares shall be wiped from the eyes of the Elect, they shall weepe no more,
greife and paine shall no more torme^t them, because all that, is blowen ouer, that is to say, they entered not into those eternall Bowres but through the fires and waters of tribulation. Truly he were iustly reputed an vnworthy soldier, who would desire to gaine victorie better cheape then his Capitaine: and how did our Capitaine and Law giuer IESVS CHRIST enter into the glorie which was due vnto him by nature? was it not by sufferance? Let vs behold then the Exemplaire of the mountaine, but the mountaine of Caluarie, before we take into our consideration, that of Thabor. Let vs looke vpon the Authour and Comsummatour of our faith, IESVS CHRIST, who choosed to vndergoe the Crosse, while glorie was proposed vnto him. Let vs imitate the Apostle who was so loyall to his Maister, that he bore in his bodie the
stigmates and markes of his crucified Lord. O how ioyfull the Apostles were, when it happened that they were to endure something for the loue of CHRIST, knowing what an eternall waight of glorie, that sufferance treasured vp in heauen for them. And if the Asserians vpon the sight of IVDITH's beautie, did comfort themselues in the extreamities of that seige, with the hope they had to enioy the faire creatures, who were in the Citie. What extreamities of miseries were we not willingly to endure, to be possessed of the inestimable felicities, which we haue represented? If by labours, saith S. AVGVSTINE, it must be atchiued, from this instant I inuoke you, o all yee torments of the world, I coniure you to burst out vpon my head, and shewre downe a mayne vpon me. Let tribulations be multiplied, and presse in troopes vpon me; let
infirmities, vexations, pouertie, want, aduersitie make head against and oppresse me. Let euery one persecute me, let all creatures bandie against me; let me be the Butt of all their arrowes, let me be the scorne of men, and the reproach of people, let my dayes be ended in pinching paines, yet will I bee too content, so that after this sharpe winter I may gather the flowres of the eternall Spring, and that I may be rancked amongst the Elect who are bright with beames of Glorie. I cannot be weaned from the plentifull and yndraynable dugges of this great and fruitefull Doctour, without suckinge a long draught, to giue some colour and life to this Draught of myne. Marke then, how he doth encourage vs to sufferances for the attayning of Eternitie. If we diligently ponder the reward that is proposed vnto vs, all that we suffer will seeme litle and light, and we shall repute our paines vnworthy of
so great a recompence. For is it not true that we should buy eternall rest at a iust Rate, though we were to pay a perpetuall labour for it; and to purchase an eternall felicitie at the price of an eternall sufferance, Marrie if you were imployed in an eternall labour, when would you come to an eternall reward? O the eternall Goodnesse! who hath made our tribulation temporall, and yet to this passing paine, he hath alotted an endlesse pleasure. Place a thousand thousand yeares before-Eternitie, and yet what doe you doe, but compare a limited with an illimited thing? Adde to this, that God did not onely prefixe a certaine tearme to our labours, but that a short one to; for what is the life of man, but the continuance of a few dayes? Though a man therfore were oppressed for the whole course of his life, with all sortes of torments, labours, greeues; though prisons, hungar, thirst, and irkesome vlcers should accompaignie him to his graue;
were it not yet an affliction of a short standing: the dayes of man are few in number, his labours short and light, and yet are followed with an endlesse Kingdome, with an eternall Beatitude. After these short sufferances, we shall be possessed of the Societie of Angells and Saintes, the inheritance of IESVS CHRIST, God him selfe, an inestimable price for so smale a labour! Wherfore, saith he in another place, let vs loue eternall life, and let vs learne how much we are to labour for it, by the exemple of those who doe passionately loue this mortall life fearing to loose it: for when any sicknesse begins to threaten them death, what doe they not doe, I doe not say to escape it, for that, is not possible, but onely for a tyme to protract deathes fatall blow? How much doth a man strugle when death doth catch him by the necke, to escape out of its clawes, he flies, he hides him self, and giues all that doth possesse, to keepe his bodie in possession
of his soule. At the price of all his fortunes he is readie to ransome his life. If he be feircely sicke, he freely endures all the paines that the Surgeons putt him to; he obeyes the Doctours order; takes downe the bitterest pill in the Apothecaries shope; he nether grugheth price nor paine, so he may escape the graue: he is willing to consume all his substance, to prolonge for some few moments more, his consumeing life; and yet to liue eternally how few are willing to endure a litle discommoditie? But if worldlings prolonge their miserable dayes, with so much instance, vigilancie, precausion, prodigalitie, paine, and torment, what ought not they to doe, whose braue and generous myndes, eye nothing that is lesse then Eternitie? And if they be esteemed prudent who spare nothing to conserue a miserable mortall life, how imprude^t must they needs be, who for an immortall one, will vse no sort of viole^ce nether against their body nor soule?



A continuation of the former discourse.
LXVI.
VErily, vnlesse the graine of wheate falling into the ground, die: it selfe remayneth alone and fruitlesse. And vnlesse we doe mortifie our selues here below, there is litle appearance, and yet lesse hope, that we shall liue euerlastingly in Heauen. In the building of SALOMONS Temple there was no noyse heard of hammars, nor saw because the timber was disposed and fitted by Carpenters in the Forrest; and the stones were cut and pollished in the Quarries, so that being led vnto the Mount-Sion, it rested onely to applie them. It is the like of the vnited stones wherof the heauenly Hierusalem is built, to witt the Elect, out of the Quarrie of
this world they were to be sent readie, and so to be disposed in their places in that TEMPLE OF PEACE. For which cause, some of them haue bene sawen, cut, carued, holed, burnt, wounded with swords, that they might be applied to that eternall building; for they are the structure and building of God, saith the Apostle. No, there is no other passage to this TEMPLE of VERTVE, but through the GATE OF LABOVR. And the Kingdome of Heauen is promised onely, in the Sermo^ which our Sauiour made of Beatitude, to the humble of heart and persecuted, that is, to such as suffer tribulations. The Kings coyne, with which letters of exchange are payed in that Contrie, are Labours; and the Saintes doe repose in their labours, for there, their workes doe sollow them. And if a woman with child, saith the holy Gospell, doe patiently endure
the panges of childbirth which are so extreamely violent, for the ioy she hath to bring forth a reasonable creature into this miserable world: what paines then ought we to feare, so our bodie be happily deliuered of our soule to Eternitie; and that when our house of clay shall be demolished, we may find one in heauen build, not with the hand of man, but with God's owne hand, wherin we shall liue, inhabit and bee for euer. And if the labours of winter and summer, and the length of a plainefull seruice, was reputed as nothing of IACOB, being pricked on by the loue be bore to RACHEL; who will not to be impatient at the short and light labours of this life, while he hath Eternitie before his eyes? Goe to then, saith a Prophete, lets take courage, and let not our armes repose, for a great reward is promised to good actions. Worke
faithfully what thou art able while tyme is lent thee to labour. Behold the reward, and nothing will seeme painefull vnto thee. I haue giuen my heart to the Diuine iustificatio^s, saith the Psalmist, in respect of the reward promised them. For the reward of such as keepe Gods law is great. Know you not, saith the great Apostle, that many runne in the race, all runne indeede, but one receaueth the Price. And they certes, that they may receaue a corruptible crowne, but we run in the race of vertue, for an immortall and incorruptible crowne. Lets so runne that we may obteyne. Those, saith the same Doctour of the Crosse, that are afflicted, are disposed therby to great rewards, and if they be tryed by God, it is to th'end, they may be worthy to haue a part with him; and that he may with his owne hand bestow vpon them, a Kingdome of honour, and a diademe of
beautie. For God crownes his Elect with glorie and honour, and doth establish them aboue all the workes of his hands. Let vs not therfore be discouraged, saith S. PAVLE, for we haue not as yet resisted sinne, nor fought to blood: we that are not ignorant that our Guide IESVS CHRIST, entered not into the Sanctuarie of Eternitie, by meanes of the blood of sheepe and goates but by powreing out his owne; at that price obtaineing for vs an eternall redemption. But I here, heape vp proofes, in confirmation of a truth, which euen Nouices in Christian discipline cannot doubt of. Let vs therfore stay our stepps, and shut vp this first meanes in these golden words of S. AVGVSTINE. O soule, what I haue is vendible; consider whether you will buy it. And what hast thou to sell, o Lord? Rest, saith he, buy it. At what rate, saith the soule? the price therof is Labour. But what
labour is required for an endlesse rest? If you will make a iust valuation, an eternall labour is due to an eternall peace. T'is true indeede, yet feare not, o soule, God is mercifull; he knowes well, that if thou wert eternally to labour for this pourchase, thou shouldst neuer attayne vnto the promissed and desired rest; and therfore, that thou mightst attayne it, he will not haue thy labour to be eternall: not that the Eternitie of glorie would not deserue it; but that thou mightest be sure to beare it. It is worth an eternall, and yet is bought for a temporall labour. In an other place, the same Father, doth enlarge and continue this consideration. When eternall life, saith he, is promissed vs, let vs place before our eyes, a life exempt fro^ all the tormoyles and troubles which we taste in this, and thou shalt more happily find out the calamities and miseries which are not to be found in that blessed life, then thou canst the infinite
blesse wherwith it is replenished (he would say, that as God, so it, is better knowen by negation then affirmation). And yet, wonderfull Mercy! this inestimable fauour is to be sold, If thou wilt, thou maist buy it: nor art thou to be troubled how to procure wherwithall to pay; It is not worth more then thou hast, or rather, respects not at all, what thou hast, but onely, what thou art. This Eternitie is worth thyselfe, and yet worth no more then thou art; giue thy selfe, and tis thyne. Why dost thou dodge, why dost thou stand vpon the price. Dost thou apprehend, that to make the payment, thou art to be sold indeed: no thou art not; pay thy selfe such as thou art, and the purchase is made. Alas I am poore and miserable, wilt thou say, nor shall I be receaued as currant money. But I dare assure thee, that in freely giuing thy selfe thou wilt become good coyne: for to giue ones selfe in confidence of such a promisse, is to be good. And
being once good, thou wilt become a reasonable price, and thou shalt not onely purchase, what I told thee of, saluation, health, life, and life euerlasting; but further, nether wearinesse, labour, hungar, thirst, nor any other paine what soeuer, shall molest thee. All the good that can be imagined, shall be there: all the euil that can be imagined shall not be there; and the continuance of that happie state, shall be eternall. I am able to make no further discouerie for nether eye hath seene, nor eare hath heard, nor heart hath conceaued the felicities of that glorie; and how should that fall within the compasse of my tongues, or penn's expression, which neuer yet entered into my heart?


Another meane.
LXVII.
IF patience in aduersitie begett the blessed hope (hope, saith the
Apostle, which confoundeth not) of happinesse in our heartes: a holy contempt of transitorie toyes, is no lesse forceable to make vs take a happie flight towards the heauenly Sion, and to make vs relish celestiall things, disdayning those base and earthly ones. In the balla^ce of man's heart, the fall of the one scale, is the others rysing; and ordinarily, the worldling is deceiptfull in his waightes, waighing profane drosse with the SANCTVARIE waightes; which the spirituall ma^, doth not, nor those, who (by attending to that which belongs to their saluation) haue all their conuersation in Heauen. The first step, that doth separate vs fro^ earth, doth aduance vs towards heauen. The Gods of the earth are seated on high, saith the Psalmist, vpon which passage, a Father of the Church saith, that those Gods are the high-soaringe soules, which like to the
birde of Paradice, doe neuer stoope to the ground; and who may say with the Apostles, behold we haue forsaken all; and who for this pious renounceing of all, doe heare that Diuine promisse: you that haue left all, shall receaue an hundredfold, herebelow, and life euerlasting, after this mortall life. This earthly trash is a heauie burde^, and doth exceedingly hinder those that striue to clime the mountaine of God. But if, by a holy contempt, we treade vpon the same burden, it rayseth vs thitherward. A faithfull speach, and worthy to be carefully layed vp in our heart. Loue not the world, nor yet that which it termes good, for its figure doth passe, and vanish like smoke. ESTHER had good reason to co^temne those royall pompes and magnificences, and to put on mourneing weedes, since she foresaw that she was about to be a Widowe, and that all those, would
presently disappeare as shadowes; being far more prudent then that proude Queene wherof mention is made in the Apocalipse, who being seated in her Throne, and gayzing vpon her selfe in her ornaments and glorie, as a Peacoke in the varietie of his glorious plumes, pronunced with as much vanitie as vntruth, I raigne; nor shall I euer become a widowe, nor yet euer resent the dint of aduersitie: but she sodainely fell from her vaine hopes: And with damage and confusion she experienced, that worldly felicitie is like to a flowre, which florisheth in the morning, but at night fadeth; like to grasse growing vpon the tiles of a house, which withereth away, euen before it appeare fully greene. This was it, which one of the auncient Sages aymed at, saying; christall is glittering and glorious to the eye, marrie in vse, britle and subiect to breaking.
But heauenly felicitie is of a more solide temper; for (besides that, according to IOB, the heauens are build of most solide brasse; and are composed of a matter which weares not a way, being exempt from all corruption or alteration) the Eternitie of glorie, which is promised to the Elect, is equall to the co^tinuance of God, who shall neuer haue end. And therfor, though that, which the wisdome of the world and Sense, esteemes true good (notwithstanding that euen its vanitie, is a true signe of the falsitie therof) should, by its allureme^ts and inchantments, make a most violent impression vpon the most resolute mynd; yet the shortnesse of its continuance, being compared to an Eternitie, shall appeare as litle bright or gratious in the ey of a setled iudgement, as the lesser starrs in the presence of the Sunne. This true esteeme made the great
Apostle repute all terreane things as durt and dung, while he proposed vnto himselfe the Conquest of Eternitie. And the Psalmist, touched with the same apprehension, cryed out; what is to me in Heauen? and besides thee what would I vpon the earth, nothing verily, o the God of my heare and the part of myne inheritance for euer. O when shall I see the day, the happie day, in which I shall appeare before thy glorious face, the onely obiect of myne eternall blesse? Teares are my foode day and night, while my desire doth incessantly presse vpon me, with this demand, where is thy God? In very deed, euen as the Sunne which causeth the day, doth at his approach driue away the darknesse, which in its absence doth couer the earth: so the light of Eternitie doth no sooner shine in the soule's Orison, but the thicke and foule vapours of terreane affections
are dispersed. T'is in vaine, my soule, for thee to search for consolation in transitorie things. Let thy thoughtes be onely placed vpon the Eternall God, and thou shalt be throughly replenished with a ioy, which shall bereaue thee of all sense of calamitie. Rise vp, o Lord, and let thyne enemyes be dispersed. Appeare onely before myne eyes, and the world, thyne enemy and myne, shall be put to flight: They shall vanish like smoke, and shall melt away as waxe before the fire. This Dagon shall fall to ruine before the Arke of thyne Eternitie. He doth passe, together with his concupiscence, but thou shalt remayne for euer; thy yeares run not by, and thou art still the same. What can then an immortall soule doe in this vallie of teares, miseries, and death, who thou touchest with a sense of the fortunate Ilands of Eternitie, and with a desire of
those eternall Hills, but sigh and breath in the Egipt of this mortalitie, after the milke and honie, which runs in abu^dance in the Land, which thy Goodnesse hath promised vnto her, taking comfort in this expectation while protracted hope doth afflict her? It is a speciall grace which God bestowes vpon his Elect, saith S. GREGORIE, in filling their hearts, with a hope, as it were certaine, of attayning the heauenly Contrie, while they wander through the wildernesse of this earth, to th end that they might behold, as it were, below them, and as a thing vnworthy of their consideration all transitorie things; and that, for the loue of Eternitie, they should treade vnder their feete, by a holy pride, the most p^osperous pleasures, riches, honours in the earth. And this is that which God speakes by the mouth of one of his Prophetes to a soule that followes him, I will rayse thee to the highest
places of the earth: and what are those high places, but the abundance of welth; the hight of honours and dignities, which haue the reputation of things high placed, by those, whose desires are abiect, and crawling vpon the ground. But if once man's heart fixe its sight vpo^ Eternitie, it then clearely discouers, how abiect and base all those things are, which before he esteemed so high: for as those that are vpon the toppe of a high mountaine, doe apprehend the things that seemed great vnto them being in the bottome of the valley, as litle pointes: so those that walke in the wayes of Eternitie, doe esteeme temporall things as nothing, and that which before seemed to be placed aboue their heade, is now found vnder their feete. The same Doctour saith in another place, nothing makes the calamities which we suffer in this transitorie life more sharpe and bitter vnto vs, then the inconsideration of the eternall rewards which are promissed
vs. But if a soule be once so happie, as constantly to turne her eyes towards those eternall riches, which ca^not perish, all that is transitorie shall be to her as nothing. The same Pope, explicating that passage of the Diuine Epithalamion, where the Spouse saith that her Spouse, had ledd her into his wine-cellar; what doe you thinke, saith he, did that Louer, vnderstand by the wine-cellar, but a secrete and profound contemplation of Eternitie? A contemplation which doth so ouersett the soule, which takes it in abundance, that she is made, as it were, drunke ther with all: but with a drunkenesse of good pourposes, and which by a laudable change of life, and a wholsome amendment of manners, tends to the heauenly Contrie, and eternall delightes. S. AVGVSTINE vpon the same subiect is of the same aduise, whe^ he councells the deuoute soule, nether to swell in prosperitie, nor to be deiected
in aduersitie, grownding vpo^ the faithfull promisse which God hath giuen her of Eternitie: a promisse which will make her conte^ne temporall felicities, yea euen the calamities of this life, if she take the eternall fire into her consideration. And if one of the Auncie^ts, speaking of the vaine ambition of humane pretentions, knew, and following his knowledge, could say, that, what goodly fortune soeuer one were possest of, did but yet appeare vile and worthlesse, to him that hoped for a better and larger; who would not iudge, that he, who should lodge his hopes in Eternitie, should find no more rest in these short mome^ts, then the doue of the deluge vpon the waters, which couered the face of the earth. And if the children of Egipt vpon the tasting of the heauenly Manna, that admirable bread of the desart, did no more plaine the
losse of their flesh-potts and onions: So after a sound iudgement, haue once relished, by a setled pourpose, the delightes of the blessed Eternitie, earthly pleasures doe but loath and disgust him. He doth easily weane himselfe fro^ the impoysoned milke of the Serpe^ts of this world, haueing once tasted that solide meate, which doth nourish for an Eternitie.


That this thought of Eternitie is the abridgement of all spirituall life.
LXVIII.
I Could here expresse many wholsome effectes, which this thought of Eternitie causeth in those, who doe frequently, and seriously ruminate it in their hearts. But I conceaue, Athanasia, that they are all co^prised in this proposition, to witt, that all spirituall life is comprehended in this so profitable and
and necessarie consideration. For what archer can hitt a marke, without ayming at it; and since all this life is but an introduction to Eternitie, how should one possibly arriue there, vnlesse he begin tymely to tend towards it, and addresse all his stepps and actions to that end. If euery Agent doe worke for some end; and if our principall and soueraigne end consiste in our eternall vnion with God in glorie, ought we not in this mortall life to take the path, which doth conduct vs to this end? If then (as I haue shewen in the first strokes of this Draught) all the good and euill which is done in the world, proceede from the neglect, or vse of this thought of Eternitie: doth it not follow, that this thought is the very thread, which must direct vs in the windings of the true life, that is, the spirituall life? All those that doe handle spirituall
matters, doe diuide such as peculiarly addict themselues to the practise of pietie, into three Classes or ranckes; Beginners, Proficiants, and the more perfect; making the first walke in the way which they call Purgatiue; the second in the Illuminatiue; the third, in the Vnitiue. In the Purgatiue they ranke those, who like vnto new Champions, doe crucifie their flesh with its concupiscence; mortifie the motions of their sensualitie, by the vigour, and holy rigour of mynd; who chastise their body and bring it into subiection; renounceing world, blood and Hell; in a word, labouring to spoyle themselues of the old man, with his wicked inclinations, and vitious habites. Walking in the wayes of pennance, and mortification; and making head against vice, least Sinne might raigne in vs; and least that Dagon might preuayle against the Arke. Now
nothing doth so effectually plane and smouth the rough and rugged wayes; nothing doth so forceably presse the Sinner to departe out of the Egipt of his iniquitie; and to forsake that accursed land of the shadowe of death, as the apprehension of eternall paines, according to that of the Prophete, Lord through thy feare we haue conceaued the spirit of Saluation. And the Psalmist, I haue done Iudgement and Iustice, because I dreaded the irreuocable sentence of the Almightie. And indeed, as there is nothing which doth so speedily free a feild of rootes and rubbidge, as the application of fire to the brambles and vndergroth, wherby it becomes thornie and wilde; so nothing doth cause a man more quickly to renounce vice; nor more efficaciously purge the soule, then the horrour of eternall fire, prepared for the diuell and his Angells.
This is to put the hatchet to the roote of the bad tree, least it might bring forth the fruites of corruption. Let not therfore the thought of the accursed Eternitie, depart out of our memorie: and we shall see the Diuine truth, which issued from the mouth of the wisman, fulfilled in vs, that we shall neuer offend: for it would be to vs, as a buckler against the firie darts of te^ptations: and if we chance to fall into sinne, it would be as a sharpe spurre, to make vs spring out of the ditch of so dangerous and deplorable an estate. There is no remedie so sharpe and bitter, that doth not seeme sweete vnto vs, if we compare it to those consuming and eternall flames. There is no passion so irregular, but it becomes orderly, and subiect to reason, when an eternall paine represents it selfe vnto vs. There is no temptation that doth not vanish, nor vice that doth not
depart, when he that is assaulted with it, doth setledly ponder, that that which doth delight, is but momentarie, but the torments due thervnto, are eternall. This is the effect of the consideration of Eternitie, in the Purgatiue way, and the force which it hath to reclayme vs from wickednesse.


A continuation of the formar discourse.
LXIX.
AS for the Illuminatiue way, whose propertie it is to incite vs to goodnes and vertue: what difficultie is incident to the pursute of vertue, which is not surmounted by the price of so great glorie, which is proposed vnto vs in Eternitie, as I haue alreadie at large declared. For the words of thy lipps o Lord, saith the Diuine Psalmist, that
is, vpon the hope of thy promisses, I haue kept the hard wayes. IACOB hauing espyed that misterious ladder (a figure of Beatitude) durst close with an Angell, and neuer leaue wrastling with him, till he had wrested a benediction from him. And was not MICHOL with SAVLS crowne (being proposed for his guerdon who should vanquish the Giant) the motife, which did so generously incite DAVID to so glorious an enterprise? O Lord, sings the Diuine Psalmist; I ranne in the way of thy Commandements, when thou didst opene and dilate my heart; And yet what is able to dilate it more then the thought of Eternitie? O how faire are the feete, that is, the affections, of a foule which directes her stepps, towards those eternall Hills, through the pathes of pietie, erecting stares in her heart, to ascend vp to the heaue^ly Sion, by the stepps
of vertues. This is she which doth rauish the Angells with admiratio^, when they discouer her ascending out of the desart of the world, as a litle rod of smoke composed of all the aromaticall spices. It is written in the Apocalipse that the first fundation of the holy Citie Hierusale^ is made of Iasper, a stone marked with all the seuerall colours which are dispersed amongst the other stones; wherby is intimated vnto vs, that the eternall Sion hath its fundation vpo^ all the vertues: and that he who pretends the attayning of it, must resolue to imbrace them all; otherwise he will not be permitted accesse. Now what vertue is not acquired by this consideration, what good habite is not contayned therin? Let vs cast an ey vpon those which are the principall, and, as it were, the roote of all the rest; and we shall find Eternitie to be the Sea, whither
all these litle brookes runne. What is FAITH but the argument of things not appeareing. And are not eternall things, those which doe not appeare? for so the great Apostle doth teach vs. What is HOPE but an expectation of eternall blesse, and the coming of the glorie of the great God? In thee, o Lord, haue I put my hoped, saith DAVID, and I shall not be confounded for euer. What is CHARITIE, but a Vertue, which, according to the Apostle, remaynes for euer? euen when FAITH and HOPE shall cease to be, and Prophecies shall be made voyde: and such as are rooted, and founded in this Vertue, doe in some measure comprehend the length, bredth, hight, and depth, of Eternitie. What is PRVDENCE, but a wise foresight of future things, and principally of the next life? for the life which ends in this world, is called a Death by the Apostle; yea yet in sharper tearmes, a
sensuall, terreane, malignant life. And it was this prudent thought of Eternitie, which MOYSES perceaued to be awanting in Israel, while he tearmed it a Nation deuoyd of Councell and iudgement and wished from his heart, that that people would become wise, vnderstanding, and foreseeing the tyme to come. Touching FORCE and TEMPERANCE, we haue shewen in the formar stroke that this thought makes one abstayne from, and contemne earthly things; and doth in courage the heart to all kinds of sufferances and crosses for the Conquest of Eternitie. Concerning IVSTICE (since eternall Glorie is tearmed the crowne of Iustice, and that no iniustice can be permitted to make entrie there) who can deney but the fruites of the thoughtes of Eternitie, are the very same with those wherof DANIEL speakes, which is, to free the soule
from sinne, and to lodge eternall Iustice in its place. And doth not the Psalmist say, that the iust shall liue for euer. PATIENCE also doth springe fro^ this thought, sith the Kingdome of Heauen is promissed to such as doe practise it in persecution. And who will not become HVMBLE vnder the powrefull hand of God, when he shall seriously consider, that the Kingdome of heauen belongs to the poore in spirit; and that the humble shall be saued, and aduanced: and that the proude of heart are cast headlong downe, with Lucifer, into perpetuall flames. And who will not turne MEEKE and mild, when he shall reflect, that the promised Land of Eternitie, is their inheritance? Who will not be deuoute and feruent in all the exercices of pietie, whether it be prayer, fasting, Almes-deedes; or in the practise of interiour or exteriour mortifications,
if he fall duely to consider, that the violent doe beare away the Kingdome of Heauen. Who will not imbrace, or at least, who will not loue and honour the Euangelicall Councells, when he reades what great rewards are promised, to the Continent, obedient, and voluntariepoore? Runne in this sort ouer all the vertues, whose pursuite and practise, is the proper imployment of the Illuminatiue way, and you shall find, that whether they be Theologicall, or morall infused, they haue all for their Obiect a supernaturall end, as faith the Angell of the schoole; and consequently, all of them ayme at Eternitie, as all the lines of the circu^ference at the vnitie of the Ce^ter. As for the vnitiue way, which consistes in a certaine adhearing to the soueraigne Good, which is God, the verie essentiall Eternitie: we will shew in the ensuing stroke, that the
essentiall Eternitie, being no other thing, properly speaking, then God himselfe, there is no thought at all, which doth more immediately, nor more generally vnite vs vnto him, then that of Eternitie. Whence I draw this Conclusion, that the consideration of Eternitie, is truely that one necessarie thing, which is so highly commended in the Ghospell, euen from the mouth of the sonne of God, and called, MARIE'S BEST PART which shall neuer be taken from her. Iudge you then, Athanasia, of what importance it is, to thinke frequently, yea incessantly of Eternitie, since it is, as it were, the pinne, whervpon all spirituall life doth turne.



Of the essentiall Eternitie.
LXX.
HItherto, Athanasia, we haue not giuen thee a straight and cleare, but an indirect view of Eternitie; we haue shewen it thee onely sideling, as BALAAM beheld the armie of Israel: we haue onely pondered the two armes therof, not the bodie: It's effects onely, not it's cause; and, as one would say, we haue seene the shouldiers onely, not the face; the accidents, not the substance therof. For albeit the Diuines teach vs, that it is a whole and perfect possession, of an endlesse life, yet doth not this description quiet my vndersta^ding, in that it doth not represe^t Eternitie as a thing created, and out of God; and which being applyed to creatures, will indeede haue no end, yet
presupposeth a begining; God alone being truely eternall; that is, without begining or end: he being the begining and end, of all that hath beeing by participation of his. But now, Athanasia, I will propose vnto you the essentiall Eternitie, which is no other thing then God himselfe. And God too, not as punishing in the Eternitie accursed, nor as rewarding in the blessed Eternitie, but as being in himselfe, as his owne essence, to his owne Eternitie: and that true increated and essentiall Eternitie, in which this created Eternitie consisteth, wherof we haue shewen some strokes before. O what an Eternitie is this, Athanasia, and whither is the flight of my thoughts carried, since it toucheth vpon the glorie of the Diuine Maiestie, in the highest regions? Here it is, that the winge and sight of an Eagle, were required, to rayse ones selfe vp
into the highnesse of the riches, and wisdome of God, who is incomprehensible in all his wayes. And to behold this Sunne of the East, which is the fountaine of all light, and which ca^not be obscured. And here, not the blacke and darke lynes of a first Draught, but euen the bright rayses of the Sunne, were more then requisite, to bring light and life to the deciphering of him, who from all Eternitie, doth inhabite an inaccessable light, and who could not be susteyned by a created vnderstanding, vnlesse it were fortified with the light of Glorie. All those Diuine perfections, which Diuinitie considers in God, vnder the name of Attributes, are in him, his owne onely and incomposed Essence: for being a pure Act, he doth not admitt in himselfe any composition at all; or multiplicitie of qualities, being all Essence, all substance. But we are
constrayned by our owne infirmitie to speake so of God, according to our ordinarie manner of co^ceaueing and discourseing: calling him Good, Iuste, Mercifull, Infinite, Eternall, Omnipotent, as we doe diuersly cast our thoughts vpon his workes, rather then vpon himselfe, who in his one and onely beeing, doth co^prehend, by way of eminencie, all the perfections which are found in Goodnes, Iustice, Mercy. So that he is not onely essentially good, but he is euen essentiall Goodnesse, all that is good being good by the onely communication and participation of this essentiall Goodnesse. Now to giue a name to this supreme excellencie, is a worke proper to the same excellencie, which as it alone doth perfectly know it selfe, so it onely is able to name it selfe. Whervpon the Angell speaking vnto SAMSON's Father, and representing vnto him
the Diuine Maiestie, said: why dost thou inquire my name which is ADMIRABLE, that is, which thou canst not conceaue, but by admiration. Howbeit, amongst the multitude of Diuine names, wherwith the holy Scripture is full; and which the bookes of the Doctours of the Church propose vnto vs, there is none more generally receaued, then that, which God by his owne mouth imparted vnto MOYSES, who demanded his name, that he might denounce it to such as should inquire after it. I AM WHO AM, said our Lord; and if they aske thee who sent thee vnto them, tell them, he that IS commanded me to come vnto you. This name, IS, saith the Angell of the schoole, is the most proper of all the Diuine names, as being the most significatiue; for it doth not expresse any forme at all, but onely a simple beeing; or rather
the beeing of beeings, as that great Genius of nature tearmed it. And God being his owne Essence and Beeing, cannot be more properly named then by the name IS: which caused S. IOHN DAMASCENE to say, that the principall name of the Diuine names, is, He who IS, because he is as an infinite Ocean, an illimited substance. Againe, this name sutes well with God, in that, it doth expresse a continuall present tyme, which doth shew the essentiall Eternitie of God, in whom, saith S. AVGVSTINE, in his bookes of the Trinitie, there is nether tyme past, nor tyme to come. Now this Eternitie is so essentiall to God, that if he were not eternall, he would cease to be God: and that created Eternitie, wherof Diuines speake, doth onely subsiste in the increated Eternitie of God himselfe, and, if we may so say, it is imperfect; for though it shall
neuer haue end, being a continuall prese^t without any measure of tyme; yet had it a begining, since God alone, of all the things which haue beeing, hath no begining. Nor doe we see any title in holy Scripture more frequently attributed vnto God, then that he is Eternall. I liue eternally saith our Lord. The Kingdome of heauen is eternall. Our Lord is great eternally. Our Lord is seated in an eternall Throne. God is not moued eternally. Those that hope in him shall not be confounded eternally. The name of his Maiestie is Eternall. He is his Elect's eternall part. Mercy is established eternally in Heauen. His Word and Truth shall dure eternally. He hath made an eternall Testament. God is liuing and Eternall for euer and euer. He is an Eternall Dominatour. He doth inhabite the eternall Hierusalem. His powre is an eternall powre, and his
Kingdome in generation and generation. And many the like passages all through the holy Scripture. Now, he is not onely eternall, but is euen the very eternall Essence, or the ESSENTIALL ETERNITIE. So that to thinke of Eternitie, is to haue God for the onely obiect of our thoughtes. And to applie the essence of our immortall soule, to his essence, who alone of himselfe hath immortalitie, is it not the perfection and fulnesse of our essentiall Beatitude? If therfore, I extolle the thought of Eternitie aboue all other thoughtes, by reason of that great and infinite Obiect, am I not grou^ded vpon a solide reason? Is not the immensitie, and inco^parable perfection therof able to rauish and drinke vp all our interiour and exteriour faculties? following that of the Psalmist, My heart and my flesh haue reioyced toward the liuing God.



That this essentiall Eternitie is all things.
LXXI.
AS God is eternall, Athanasia, or rather Eternitie it selfe, so is he also infinite, or rather infinitie it selfe. Infinite according to his essentiall greatnesse which is immense and boundlesse: Infinite also in his co^tinuance which is without limitation too, to speake with the Prince of Schoolemen. He is euery where by his existence, and doth existe in euery thing, filling Heauen and earth, and all that is therin. In a word, he is in euery place, and beyond all place, by his essence, presence, and powre. But he is in the Blessed Eternitie after an admirable manner: for the Scripture doth assure vs, that he is all things in all his Elect. There, saith S. AVGVSTINE,
God is the vniuersall good of all the Saintes, and the perfect Beatitude of all their desires: there, he is light and colour to their eyes: musike to their eares, honie to their taste, or rather a hidden Manna; and a delicious baulme to their smell. In him they haue the diuersitie and beautie of sundrie seasons, the freshnesse of the Springe; the brightnesse of the Sommer: the fruitfulnesse of the fall of the leafe; the rest and repose of winter: In fine all that which may delight their senses, or solace the faculties of their soule. There, saith S. BERNARD, God is plenitude of light to the VNDERSTANDING: multitude of Peace to the WILL: and eternall consolation to the MEMORIE. To be short, those shadowes of good, which are scattered ouer terreane things, as droppes of dew, and are distributed rarely and onely by parcells, are eminently in God, and as it were in an infinite Ocean. If fleeting toyes
doe so desperately delight such as are taken with the^, that their reason is inchanted, and their wisdome drunke vp therin: how shall they be taken with him, whose hands are filled with infinite delightes? If this mortall and created life be so precious, how precious shall he be, who hath not onely life in himselfe, but who is life it selfe, and in whom we liue and are. If the acquaintance of perfect creatures be so pleasing a thing: how much more sweete is the perfectio^ of the Creatour, which is so compleate, and the very modell of all perfection? If these fading earthly beauties be so gayning and engaging: how rauishing shall his beautie be, which is admired by the Sunne and Moone, and in whose presence the starrs are not bright? If the antiquitie of nobilitie haue such a rate put vpon it, by the vanitie of those that doe adore it; how much
more is his to be prised, who is the old of dayes, whose begininge is without begining? If worldly honours and fortunes be courted by so many, how much more is he to be sued for and pursued, whose house is replenished with glorie and riches. For if it be he who made all things good, and co^municated vnto them, all that is delightfull or wishfull in them, must we not infallibly persuade our selues, that he reserued the excellencie therof for himselfe, but an excellencie which doth infinitly surpasse all that we are able to imagine. What happinesse, saith S. AVGVSTINE, shall their be in the Blessed Eternitie, where there shall be no euil at all; nor any thing awanting that is good. There our labour shall be to praise God, who shall be all in all: Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, o Lord, for euer and euer they shall praise thee. He who gaue the vertue,
shall be the reward therof; promising himselfe as an inestimable price, by the mouth of the Prophete, saying, I will be their God, and they shall be my people; I will be all things to them which they can honestly desire, life, saluation, foode, abundance, Glorie, Honour, Peace, and all kinds of felicitie: for so is that sacred word to be vnderstood; God shall be all in all, that is, he shall be the fulnesse of all their desires. There, the Elect peaceably enioying a sacred repose, and an eternall Saboath, shall see how sweete our Lord is, being filld with him, who shall be in them all that can be desired. O my God, thou art my deare Truth, my true Eternitie, my eternall felicitie! The same Doctour speaking of this essentiall Eternitie, which is God himselfe, comprehending in himselfe all goodnesse, discourseth of it in this sort: There is nether corruption, defect; old age, nor
frowardnesse in thee; but contrariwise a perpetuall peace, a solemne glorie, a ioy without end, a continuall solemnitie. Thou art true alacritie, and a flowre of peerlesse beautie, of youth, and perfect health: There, is nether yesterday nor to morrow in thee, but a perpetuall TODAY: thyne is saluation, life, and peace; o great God who art all things! what glorious things are spoken of thee, since in thee is the true Abode of all those who liue in true ioy! In thee, there is no feare, no sorrow; desire passeth presently into satisfaction, being answeared with a speedie and plentuous possession of all that is desired. O God thou dost inebriate thyne Elect with the plentie of thy house, and with the torrent of thy pleasure thou shalt make them drinke; because with thee is the fountaine of life, and in thy light we shall see light, when they shall see thee in thy selfe, and all things in thee, and thee in all things, with a sight, that shall not be interrupted,
which is the toppe of their eternall felicitie. And in another place he saith vpon the same subiect. Loue Eternitie and thou shalt raigne for euer with IESVS CHRIST, if IESVS CHRIST be thyne onely end: And againe. Vnite thy heart to God's Eternitie, and thou shalt be eternall with God. It was an apprehension and feeling of this, which drew that asperation so frequently from the mouth and heart of S. FRANCIS. O my God thou art myne ALL. And doth not that passage of the heaue^ly harmonie which S. IOHN heard in his Reuelations allude to this? Benediction, and glorie, and wisdome, and thankesgiuing, honour, and power, and strength to our God for euer and euer. AMEN.



An application of the Heart to this essentiall Eternitie.
LXXII.
BVt that which most importeth, Athanasia, is to know, how we ought to applie our thoughtes to this essentiall Eternitie, which is the verie Diuinitie. This is rather to be done by a prone and louing humilitie, then by a haughtie and swelling knowledge; Lord my heart is not exalted, nether are myne eyes loftie^nether haue I walked in great matters, nor in meruelous things aboue me, cryed out the Royall Psalmist. My thoughtes haue bene humble, knowing that thou louest the humble heart, and that he that extolles himselfe, makes thee ascend yet higher, and put thy selfe in a greater distance from him. Be thou praysed o Lord for euer, in that thou
hidest thy selfe from the wise, and great witts, and reuealest thy selfe to thy litle humble ones. I haue giue^ you some directions, Athanasia, to auoyd the accursed Eternitie, and to attaine the Blessed: yet I must here tell you, with the great Apostle: behold I teach you a way far more excellent, more short, noble and efficacious. Consider an Archer that shutts at a Butt, he takes his ayme nether too high, nor too low; nether of this nor that side; but setts his ey and arrow iust vpon the midst of the white. Will you beleeue me, Athanasia, vpon this subiect, you shall imitate his manner and ayme; and without looking ether to the right or left hand, that is, without ether considering the powrefull hand of God in the accursed Eternitie, or that which distributes crownes and rewards in the Blessed, you shall fix the ey of your contemplation vpon
the eternall God, and vpon his essentiall Eternitie; and approaching vnto him in an humble confidence, you shall be illuminated, and your face shall not be confounded. No no, Athanasia, feare not it is he; be confident he hath ouercome the world. Feare not to be oppressed with the glorie of so high a Maiestie. His delightes are to be with the children of men. He is still at their Gate, and knockes to haue entrie, and to make his abode with them, and to inrich them with good things. He doth not onely not disdayne that we should loue him, but he disdaynes that we loue him not; and complaynes that he is made a solitude in Israel, and that he is not beloued: and that the wayes of the eternall Sion weepe, that none doe frequent their solemnities. Let vs therfore goe with confidence to the Throne of his Grace, if we desire to haue part in his Glorie. Let vs permit
him to wash the feete of our affections, if we will with S. PETER, haue Societie with him. This God then who is an essentiall Charitie, doth not onely permit vs to loue him, but euen commands it, and that vnder paine of death, death euerlasting. The first and greatest of his Commandements, is all of the Loue we owe him. This loue did once vnite the Diuine and humane nature in the Person of the WORD; and did so farre exinanite the eternall Sonne of the eternall Father, as to become man, to take vpon him the forme of a seruant; to appeare in earth, and to be conuersant with men. A loue which may well rayse man towards God, since it could bring God downe to man. A loue, the band of perfection, which vnites the equall, and doth equalise such as it doth vnite; A Loue, which hauing once personally vnited, as S. AVGVSTINE saith, the
light of the Diuinitie, to the clay of our mortalitie, is able to eleuate our desires euen vnto God, and make vs participant of the Diuine nature, which is done by Charitie, infused into our hearts by the Holy Ghost. It is this Diuine Loue, which separating our affections, not onely from dangerous and superfluous things, but euen from things which are not euil, yet are subiect to be loued with excesse, and with too strong and inordinate a passion, shall make vs behold all created things in God; and will so gouerne our inclinatio^s, that we shall affect no creature but in God, for God, and according to God: wherin consisteth the perfect practise of that Diuine Co^mandement, which commands vs to loue God with all our heart, with all our soule, with all our spirit, with all our strength, and euen aboue all things. For a soule that is come to this degree
of perfection, that she loues nothing but in God, and God in all things: in proper speach, loues not many things, nor is not in the folicitude inseparable from the multiplicitie of louely obiects, but she loues but one onely thing, which is God, the one true necessarie thing, and out of whom all is but miserie and affliction of spirit. And because in all that which the order of Charitie proposeth vnto her to be loued, she loues God alone, she loues him equally in all, and as couragiously in her enemy, as te^derly in her friend; because she loues him onely out of all other things, and without all other things, but nothing at all without him, or out of him. If it be ESTHER alone that ASSVERVS loueth, saith my blessed Father in his Theotime, why should he loue her more when she is parfumed and adorned, then when she is in her comon attire? If it be our Sauiour onely
that a soule loueth, why should she not as well loue the Mount-Caluarie, as Thabor, sith he is as truly in the one as the other: and why should she not pronounce as cordially in the one as in the other; It is Good for vs to be here. She can loue our Sauiour in Egipt without louing Egipt; why then shall she not loue him in the banquet of SIMON the LEPROVS, without louing the banquet? And if she loue him amidst the blasphemies which are vomited out against him without louing the blasphemies, why shall she not loue him parfumed with MAGDELAINES precious oyntments; without louing the parfumes or smells? It is a true signe that one loues God onely in all things, when one loues him equally in all things, since he being alwayes equall to himselfe, the inequallitie of loue towards him, must needs spring from some thing which is not he. Whence the soule that loues God purely and singulary, loues him no more with
the whole vniuerse to boote, then all alone without the vniuerse, because all that which is out of God, and is not God, is as nothing to her. O pure soule! who loues not euen Paradice it selfe, but because God is there loued: and is so soueraignely loued in his Paradice, as, that if he had not a Paradice to bestow, yet would he nether be lesse loulie, or lesse beloued of this generous soule, who knowes not how to loue the Paradice of her God, but onely her God of Paradice, and who puts no lesse rate vpon the Caluarie where her Sauiour was crucified, then the Heauen where he is glorified. O how well doth this saintly Bishope speake, my Athanasia, whose tearmes I durst not paraphrase; nor disguise or change his venerable words, least I might loose his deuoute se^se, expressed in words of so great energie, and so full of spirit and vertue, that all the flanting tearmes of worldly wisdome, seeme to
me far lesse persuasiue and powrefull. How forcibly and sweetly doth he teach vs in this discourse not to looke vpon the two hands of God, that of Iustice and vengance, and that other of Mercy and reward, but to search after his face alone; and to feare and loue him for himselfe, not for the punishments which he threatens vice; nor for the reward, which he proposeth to vertue: because he is altogether to be honored, worshiped and serued for the loue of him selfe, yea although he had nether Paradice for reward, nor yet Hell for Punishment. The blessed and accursed Eternitie, are onely to be considered as things accessorie. Our prime intention, and cheife attention are to be set vpon the Diuine Eternitie, or the eternall Diuinitie, vnlesse we would loose the title of the children of God, and through feare of eternall punishments, or desire of eternall
rewards beesteemed slaues and hirelings. Let's loue God, Athanasia, and let him dispose of vs as he pleaseth. Let vs be in his hands, as clay in the hand of the Potter. Let him make of vs vessells of honour or ignominie. Be it nobly or ignobly, so we be his, it sufficeth. Lets turne our eyes from rewards or punishments, and let vs fixe them vpon our Lord. Let vs behold his amiable face. Let vs set our view vpon his hands, but as a faithfull hand-maide vpon those of her Mistrisse. Let vs receaue indifferently that which comes from the right ha^d of prosperitie, and the left of aduersitie. Although he should euen kill vs, lets hope in him. And let vs hope without hope, yea euen against all apparence, that nothing shall separate vs from his Charitie. Let vs cast all our thoughtes vpon him. And in steed of staying our thoughtes vpon the created, and as
it were, the accidentall Eternitie, of Heauen or Hell, let vs onely be fastened vpon the essentiall Eternitie which is God himselfe, who hath in his hand the extreamities of the earth. And who keepes the keyes of eternall life and death. Let vs not so dwell vpon the thought of Heauen or Hell's Eternitie, as that we doe not more thinke of his Eternitie who made them both; this, for the Diuells and their associates; that, for the Angells and the Elect. O eternall Diuinitie! o Diuine Eternitie! thou art he whom I consider, and whom I seake for; to thee onely it is that I aspire: for without thee, the created Eternitie would not bee, since it doth not subsiste but by the eternall essence of the essentiall Eternitie, which is no other the^ God himselfe. And yet further to purisie myne affection, and bring it to its full perfection, henceforth I will not so much
loue the Eternitie of God, as the God of Eternitie, though God be that same Eternitie, and that same. Eternitie be God himselfe. And if, by the imagination of an impossible thing, one could be in Hell with his grace, his accursed Eternitie would not be dreadfull: nor is the Blessed Eternitie to be desired, but that eternall life is to see God eternally, eternally to depe^d vpon him. O eternall God! who is like vnto thee, who is like vnto thee; who is like vnto our Lord God, who inhabites in the places aboue! And what Eternitie can be compared vnto his, from whom proceedes all Eternitie, seing he hath made the ages of ages! O Great God, direct my wayes in thy presence, and make me walke before thee in perfection, that is, perfect, in such sort, my intentions, that forgetting myne owne interest, and nether staying my selfe in the blessed
or accursed Eternitie, I may onely looke after thyne essentiall Eternitie, which is thy selfe, to whom be honour and glorie from generation to generation, for euer and euer, in the Eternitie of Eternities. Amen.


An aspiration of Hope.
LXXIII.
BVt o Lord will it not be too great a presumption for a worme of the earth, to rayse it selfe towards thyne infinite Eternitie, and promisse himselfe one day in thy glorie, to be vnited thervnto? Yea verily it were a manifest vanitie, if a soule should persuade her selfe, that of her selfe, and by the strength of her owne winge she could wind her selfe thither. But as of her selfe she can doe nothing; so together with thee, being fortified by thee, what can she not performe
o great God, since she holds her whole beeing of thy Grace? What may she not, what ought she not to expect from thy grace, since it is written, that thy grace is eternall life? And againe with what confidence must not her heart needs be encouraged, when she shall cast the eyes of her consideration vpon the great price, and infinite merites of thyne eternall Sonne, o eternall Father a Sonne, who hath layed her open the way to Eternitie, not by the blood of gotes or calues, but acquiring vnto her by his owne blood an eternall and plentuous redemption. O my soule what are we not to hope from the Mercy of so good a God, and who hath loued vs with an eternall and excessiue Charitie; a Charitie so excessiue, that he bestowed his owne Sonne, to be the propitiation for our Sinnes. When we were dead by our crymes, his grace restored vs to life.
Our Sauiour dying vpo^ the Crosse, did quicken vs by his death, and the same reuiuour doth promise vs a like resurrection; and ascending vnto heauen, he goes to prepare vs a place before the Throne of his glorie. Which made the great Apostle writing to the Ephesians, say, that God who is rich in mercy, for his exceding Charitie wherwith he loued vs euen while we were dead by sinnes, quickened vs together in CHRIST, by whose grace we are salued: and hath raysed vs vp with him selfe, making vs sit with him in the celestials in IESVS CHRIST shewing to future ages the abundant riches of his grace, through his benignitie towards vs in IESVS CHRIST. And the Prince of the Apostles S. PETER: Blessed be God, and the Father of our Lord IESVS CHRIST, who according to his great Mercy hath regenerated vs vnto a liuely hope, by the resurrection of IESVS CHRIST from
the deade, vnto an inheritance incorruptible, and incontaminate, and that cannot fade conserued in the Heauens in you. For what ought not, those to hope for, who are inrowled, as members, in the misticall body of the Holy Church, whose heade he is, being most reasonable, that the Champions should follow their Commander in his triumph, if they did accompanie him in his Combats vnder the Banner of the Crosse. You that haue followed me, said he to his Apostles, you shall be set vpon seates, in the Kingdome which my Father hath prepared for you in Eternitie. There it is, that the Elect like vnto Eagles, shall flocke about the bodie of the glorious humanitie of our Redeemour; and where, crowned with the crowne of Iustice, they shall lay them downe at the feet of this La^be Conquerour of the earth, and who vanquished the world. And if the
eternall Father hath giuen vs his Sonne, how will not he giue vs all things with him; especially since this Sonne hath the key of DAVID (key, Scepter of his Empire) vpon his shouldiers. A key with which he opens and none can shut. Behold, saith S. IOHN, what Charitie the eternall Father hath communicated vnto vs, that we should be named and be his Sonnes: and if his Sonnes, his Heires also, Heires truely of God, and Coheires of CHRIST. It was this holy hope, that moued the Psalmists heart so generously to lanch out, as by so many flightes, towards the blessed Eternitie. Come let vs ascend into the Hill of our Lord, and into the house of the God of IACOB. Hope in him all yee congregations of the faithfull: for those that hope in him vndersta^d the truth of his promises, and those that are faithfull in his loue, doe place their confidence therin.
Those that hope in him shall not be confounded for euer: for such as put their confidence in him shall be no more shaken then the Mountaine of Sion; but replenished with ioy in the expectation of the eternall felicitie, they cryed out; I reioyced when I was told, that we were to goe into the house of our Lord. And indeed what is not a man to hope, of an infinite Bountie? what ought not one to expect from so solemne promises, and whose truth remaynes for euer? No Lord, neuer, neuer will I forget thy iustifications; for it is by them that thou hast giuen me life. I doe firmely beleeue, that, if my soule doe constantly adheare vnto thee, thy right hand will receaue one, into thy bosome. O how happie are those whom thou hast chosen and taken as thyne, for they shall dwell in thyne eternall Court for euer and euer. Let's make no doubt of it my soule, he
that by his grace moues vs to tend to this goale, will not forsake vs in the midst of our course and in so faire a way, but, since his workes are perfect, he will heape grace vpon grace, and will make vs happily arriue at the Port and point of all consummation. O God draw vs after thee, (sith it is thee alone whom we search, and whom we couet in the night of this life) and we will runne in the odour of thy parfumes. Receaue vs according to thy word, to th'end we may liue in thee, and of thee, and confound vs not in our expectation, which is wholy in thee, our vncha^geable felicitie, and onely Eternitie.


A practise to engraue in our heart the memorie of Eternitie.
LXXIV.
IT is not all to sow, Athanasia, but the principale thing is to
reape the crope. The Theorie is faire, like vnto RACHEL, but yet barraine: but the Practise is fertile, like LIA, though lesse agreeable in the eye. It is not enough to make specious speculations: vnlesse our actio^s doe answeare vnto them, all is worth nothing: yea they serue paraduentures to leade vs into ruine; for the seruant that knowes the will of his Maister, and doth it not, shall be bett with many stripes. All that say Lord, Lord, shall not enter into glorie, but those that shall obserue the heaue^ly Fathers Commandements. To enter into the Marriage of the Lambe, it is not enough to haue the Lampes lighted, but there must be oyle in them too. Hell is full of the chaffe of good desires: but the Granarie of Heauen, receaues onely the wheate of good workes. Let vs descend therfore to the Practise, before we sound the retreate; and let vs put the
last singer to this DRAVGHT by spirituall endeauours, wherby to imprint deeply in our heartes, this wholsome memorie of Eternitie, be it the Blessed, accursed, or Essentiall. It is reported that the great TAMERLANE, who in his tyme was the scourge of God, and the terrour of the world, was wont in Camping himselfe before a Towne (which shut the Gates, and resolued to withstand the dreadfull forces of his troopes) to put out the first day of the Seige a white Bannar, in signe of pardon, mildnesse and mercy, in case they should freely re^der themselues vp into his hands. The second day he caused a reade one be hung out, to signifie that in the co^position, some of them should pay for it. But the third day he set out a black one, as a signe of his indignatio^, and to protest vnto them, that there was no place left to Clemencie; but that taking
the Towne by force, he would offer vp all the inhabitants victimes to DEATH, without all respect to age or sexe. These three colours, Athanasia, wherwith DRAVGHTES are made (for ordinarily they are minuted vpon white paper with vermillion and blacke) doe represe^t vnto vs, those three standarts, and the reference which they haue to the three sorts of Eternities, which I haue deciphered vnto you. The white, as the ground, doth put before your eyes the Essentiall Eternitie, which is the proper essence of God, the eternall fundation of all created Eternitie. If we deliuer our selues vp to his loue and milde Clemencie, we may confidently expect from this so sweete a God to them that seeke him, that white stone promised to the Elect in the Apocalipse, which shall be a better marke of the reward of eternall saluation, to such as haue
whitened their soule in the blood of the Lambe. The rede colour, which conteynes light in it, and is the colour of the Rose, doth prefigure vnto vs the Blessed Eternitie, where the Roses doe neuer fade; and where the Elect behold the light of the Diuinitie in the light of Glorie. But withall this bloodie colour doth intimate, that none arriues at this Felicitie, but by the price of the blood of the Lambe; and that through the fire and water of many tribulations and sufferances, They shall be saued, according to the Apostle, yet as by the fire, of anguishes and labours. But alas how nakedly doth the black colour, a colour of mourning, sadnesse, and night, represent, that accursed Eternitie; wherin, are exteriour darknes, without all hope of day; where are gnashings of teeth, and the rest of the Calamities, which rudely and weakely we haue drawen. O Athanasia,
to th'end that those bannars, no lesse daunting then the Archangell's tru^pet; or rather, to th'end that that which they represent, may neuer depart out of our view: and that this thought may not be blotted out of our soule, make a full resolution to exercise your selfe in the ensuing Practises. Sithens Habits are not begotten in vs, according to all Philosophie, but by often iterated Actes. If your heart be truely touched with a desire of eternall saluation, it will be like vnto the Saylers needle touched with a Loadstone, which turnes continually towards the North, so your thoughtes will incessantly direct themselues towards Eternitie; now, towards the Blessed; now, towards the Accursed; now, towards the essentiall, this last imbracing the two former, as the Firmament the inferiour Spheares. And though the methode which I am about to propose
vnto you, to helpe to stay your mynd vpon this Obiect, may seeme at the first sight verie simple, I would aduise you, not to dispise it for all that, as did NAAMAN at first the aduise of the Prophete, to wash himselfe seauen tymes in Iorden, if he would be deliuered of his leprosie. Call to mynd, that the matter of the Sacramentes, which are the instrumentes of Diuine graces, is verie simple and common, yet vnder the vaile of so slender appearances, ly hid, the infinite treasures of wisdome and Goodnes. Why, euen the Scripture it selfe sends vs to Pismires, litle birds and flowres to gather from them profitable lessons and instructions. Take then for your first PRACTISE (if I may haue beleife with you, that which hath brought a wonderfull profit to some soules of myne acquaintance) to thinke as often of Eternitie, as you
heare the cloke strike, night or day. Let this sound put you in mynd, that stepp by stepp you doe so approach to your end, that by an insensible progresse you drawe neere your graue; which ought to be the Gate of Eternitie. And then soaring in spirit beyond transitorie things, which doe vanish as a shade, aspire to that blessed Eternitie, not subiect to the measure of tyme, which is the course of the Sunne or the PRIMVM MOBILE, and say: when shall my feete be established vpon the liuely Rocke, that my stepps may no more slide, and that the firmament being as a pauement, I may walke vpon the face of the starrs. This will come to passe, my Athanasia, if you doe carefully, and duely, manage the houres and moments, of which we are about to speake: and if, while tyme serues, you will doe good deedes, which doe addresse
and bring vs to Eternitie.
For the second PRACTISE take those three tymes, The morning, Noonetyde, and Euening, wherof DAVID makes mention, saying: In the euening, morning, and the midst of the day, I was myndfull of God. And to helpe your memorie, be attentiue to the ANGELVS DOMINI BELL, which doth admonish vs to recite three tymes the Salutation of the Angell, in honour of the Misterie of the Incarnation of the Sonne of God: and ioyne to this pious custome the memorie of Eternitie, by thinking, that the Immortall became mortall, and the Eternall for your saluation did subiect himselfe to Tyme, in vniting his Diuinitie to our humanitie. How good occasion doth this descent of the Sonne of God into earth administer vnto you, to rayse vp your selfe to Heauen, and there to seeke a permanent
Citie for euer, in the holy Sion. Vndertake this holy exercise by taske, and for the space of some dayes; to th'end that custome may beget in you a habite, frequently to thinke of Eternitie.
For the third PRACTISE: oblige your selfe by a firme pourpose (yet without vow) to say euery day at some houre most comodious for you, three PATER NOSTER's. And in reciting them, to thinke of the Blessed, accursed, and essentiall Eternitie, which is God. Vniting your selfe to the last by Loue: by desire to the Blessed: detesting the accursed, rather by the correction of your manners, and amendment of life, then by emptie words. For as we come not to the celestiall Eternitie without doing good; so we auoyd not the accursed, but by flying euill.
When you recite your beades, or the Crowne of our Blessed Lady, a
prayer very familiar to all those who make profession of pietie. Let this crowne of flowres, put you in mynd of the flowres, which neuer fade, wherof the Garland of Eternitie is wrought. Let the round forme of this Crowne make you myndfull, that the Sphearicall figure which hath nether begining nor end, is the Symbole of the essentiall Eternitie, which neuer had begining, nor shall euer haue end. This you may vse as a fourth PRACTISE.
None can liue like a good Christian, who doth not twice a day, at least, wind vp the Cloke of his heart, and thinke of his wayes, to witt, in the morning and euening: These are two tymes, which he that desires to liue according to God, and to direct his footsteps in the pathes of Peace, ought neuer to omitt. Take then some litle part of that tyme, to cast a looke vpon Eternitie, that totall
co^tinuance, which is neuer followed with euening nor morning. And beseech God Almightie, that you may so passe through temporall, that you may not loose eternall things. This shall be a fift PRACTISE for you. Lets passe to


Other indeuours.
LXXV.
THere is nothing so frequent in the mouth of Christians, Athanasia, as the Prayer which our Lord and Maister made to direct vs to his heauenly Father, according to his words and spirit, to thend that hauing his will in our mouth, we might be heard for the reuerence of it. If you will beleeue me, as often as this holy Prayer shall passe through your lipps, you shall call to mynd the Essentiall Eternitie by apprehending that you speake to
the Eternall God. You shall thinke of the Blessed Eternitie, in making this petition: Thy Kingdome come: and of the accursed Eternitie in pronunceing that other: Deliuer vs from euil, since it is the collection and fulnesse of all euils. And let this aduise passe for THE SIXT ENDEVOVR OR PRACTISE.
You may doe the like when pietie shall moue you to salute the Blessed virgine in the words of the Angell, and the Church. And when as you shall beseech her to assiste you, by her intercession in the houre of your departure out of this life, call to mynd that this houre shall be the tyme, and instant, which shall decide your Eternitie. A moment, in which you will stand in great need of her assistance, to auoyd the perills of Hell, and to acchiue the Land of the ^ueing. Let this be the SEAVENTH PRACTISE.

 I say the same of the Apostles Creed. When you recite it, waigh the Articles therof in the waights of the Sanctuarie. The Communion of Saintes of the Triumphant Church, with those of the Militant, And Life euerlasting, and they will serue you as MEMORIALLS to engraue in your soule the Memorie of Eternitie. Behold the EIGHT PRACTISE.
Whether you assiste in the solemne songe of the Diuine Office; or you recite your boures apart. Remember, that for diuers reasons the holy Church hath ordayned, that these two versicles should be added to the end of euery Psalme, Glorie be to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the Holy Ghost. Euen as it was in the begining, and now and euer, etc. And that amongst the others, this is not the least prowrefull, to imprint the memorie of Eternitie in the mynds
of the Faithfull. Take this for a NINGHT PRACTISE.
The Iewes, that they might continually reme^ber Gods law, carried it about with them; yea wore it euen before their eyes written vpon Phylacteries or peeces of parchement: Vndersta^ding literally certaine passages of the auncient Couenaunt; wherby it is commanded, that one should alwayes behold them, that is, that one should haue them as rules of their actions. I would to God, that Christians were as carefull to haue still before their eyes the eternall Ghospell, and to that effect, they had painted Tables in their houses, to renew the memorie therof. I know some personages, who to this pourpose, caused the words of a Prophete, to be written vpon the chimney of their chambers in letters of Gold. WHO IS ABLE TO LIVE FOR EVER IN A CONSVMING FIRE,
AND AMIDST ETERNALL FLAMES? This is facile and Fruitfull, and shall be counted for the TENTH PRACTISE.


An other memoriall of Eternitie.
LXXVI.
BEsides these former PRACTISES which are very familiar, I will yet bestow vpon you, Athanasia, a verie facile Memoriall, to make you thinke of Eternitie vpon euery occasion. It is the vse of Aspirations, or Reflections, which the Doctours of spirituall life doe so highly recommend, to such as desire to liue piously, and according to God. If you will please to make vse of it, you will shortly find by experience, that all things will rayse you towards God, who is the essentiall Eternitie, wherin you will represent vnto your selfe the differe^t
Idea's of the Blessed or accursed Eternitie. All the creatures being as so many Mirrours vnto you, shall discouer the Image of the Eternall God. And which way so euer you turne your selfe, the inuisible and eternall God shall appeare in visible and temporall things. All that can fall within the knowledge of your senses, shall beare you aboue your selfe to him that passeth all vnderstanding. Or at the least, you may make reflection vpon the eternall delightes or colours, which doe attend you in the blessed or accursed Eternitie, according to your comportment in this life. And to afford you some smale scantling of that so familiar an exercise to those that are conuersant in the knowledge of Saintes: As oft as you shall behold this vniuersall obiect of heauen and earth, which was S. ANTONIE's great booke, wherin he read in capitall letters the
Authour's greatnes, whom all this admirable fabrike cost but one smale word, what will hinder you to say with DAVID, o Lord how wonderfull is thy name through all the world: thy magnificence is extolled beyond the Heauens; Heauens which are but the workes of thy hands: Heauens which shall passe, while thou shalt still remaync thy selfe, since thy beeing is Eternitie it selfe.
In contemplating the sundrie beauties which God hath disper^^^ in the world, rauishing the beholders eyes with admiration, let vs say with an auncient Father, if God permit the ^se of so many goodly things euen to his enemyes, what will he reserue for his friends in the life to come?
In beholding the Sunne, the world's onely eye, the fountaine of light, from whence all the other starrs borrow their brightnes, doth not occasion present it selfe, in which
we may consider the increated light of that God, who is all light, and whom darknes cannot obscure, who doth inhabite an inaccessible light; who is the Sunne of Iustice: who is the true light, by which euery one coming into this world is enlightened. And to lift vp our thoughtes towards the Sunne of Iustice, the Orient from aboue, towards that heauenly Citie which stands in need of no Sunne nor Moone, because Gods brightnes doth lighten it, and its Lampe is the Lambe.
When the day doth enlighten vs, and discouer vnto vs so many beauties which the nightly vayle doth hide from our eyes: Alas, may we say, when shall the faire day of Eternitie appeare, which shall be followed by no night, and where we shall see the light of the Diuinitie in the light of Glorie?
And when the night, mother of
sleepe and rest, shall spreade her darke mantle, all besett with starrs, ouer the face of the earth, if we desire to with-draw our thoughtes from the sad night, of the accursed Eternitie, marked in the Scripture with the name of exteriour darknes, a night which shall neuer see the day of Grace or Glorie, what shall hinder vs, in beholding so many torches which sparkle in those celestiall vaultes, vpon a cleare night, to propose vnto our selues the Blessed, who shine as starrs for perpetuall Eternities, differing in blesse and brightnes, as one starre differs from another. Why may we not also contemplate the essentiall Eternitie of God vnder this Symbole, since it is written, he set his signet vpon the darknes. That his night is as bright as day; and his darknes shineth like light. So shall the night afford vs a gratefull light. And during the obscurities we shall lift
vp our hands towards the holy places, blessing our Lord, till our cha^ge shall draw neere, and that we shall see him no more after a darke manner but face to face.
If the Sunn's course within his annuall circle, shewe vnto vs the diuersitie of seasons, the floures of the Spring, and the fruites of the fall; may not these things bring him vnto our consideration, who is the flowre of the feild, and the lilie of the vally, whose lilie is most florishing; him, in a word, who is the fruite of life, the fruit of the blessed virgins wo^be, the Sonne of the Eternall God; whose floures are fruites of honour and honestie. And the seasons of Summer and winter in the distempered excesse of their heates and cold, are they not figures of that infortunate Eternitie, where the damned passe out of icie waters into flames?
If we looke vpon the Elements
wherof all the mixt bodies are composed, doe not earth and Fire prefigure vnto vs the accursed Eternitie, since the earth conteynes the fire of Hell with in its Center, which shall neuer be extinguished. And are not the Aire and Water a picture of Paradice where the Blessed doe flie and swimme as foole and fishe in the essentiall Eternitie? Is it not written, that the Elect, after the Doome of the last Assises shall be taken vp into the ayre after IESVS CHRIST? and that in heauen they shall drinke of the torrent of pleasures eternally, and swime in those impetuous floodes, which doe make the Citie of God ioyfull?
Whether we make reflection vpon our owne or other mens liues; or whether we consider in an others death, the picture of our owne, which we cannot escape: is it not a iust occasion to thinke of the life which
shall neuer dye, and of that second death, which shall neuer liue, although indeede it can neuer dy nether?
If, according to the Apostle, we may eate and drinke to God's glorie; why may not we also in taking our repast thinke of the sacietie, which we hope for in his glorie, when, as most happie children of the Deitie, we shall be set at our heauenly Fathers table, fed with the same foode with himselfe, because we shall enioy the same Beatitude, by which God is happie: for being happie of himselfe, in himselfe shall be our eternall happines, when we shall be made partakers of him, made like vnto him, co^formable to his Image, and (to vse the tearme of the holy Scripture) partakers of his Diuine nature.
While we take our repose in our bedd, why may we not thinke of
him that is eternall? and reflect vpon the repose which he prepares for vs in Eternitie, if in the tyme of this mortall course we fight lawfully for him. O God, thou art my repose for euer and euer, I haue made choyce of the bosome of thy goodnes to remayne therin eternally. Who will giue me the wings of a Doue to flie vp to that assured repose; and to passe into the place of the admirable Tabernacle euen vnto the house of God?
We may intertaine our selues with the same thoughts vpon Sonday, the day of rest and repose: seeing we are commanded to cease from corporall labours, to be free to contemplate the Diuine Goodnesse, and that delicate Saboath, which the Saintes enioy in Eternitie; for there it is, saith the holy Ghost, that they rest from labours, and where they reape in ioy, what they had sowen in teares.

 Vpon festiuall days, whether it be of the mysteries of our holy Fayth, or of the solemnities of our Sauiour IESVS, of his holy mother, or of Saintes, can we be imployed in a better thought, then with the desire of imitating them, to meet them in Eternitie, by walking in the pathes which they haue marked vs out? For in vaine should we boast that we are members of IESVS CHRIST, and children of Saints, if we refuse to walke as they haue walked; that so following their example, we may come to be made worthy vnto the part of the lot of Saintes in the light of eternall felicitie. Vpon worke dayes, which the Church Office calls ferialls, we are to thinke, that none comes to the eternall Ferialls but by labours and suffera^ces. Whervpon the Scripture councelleth vs to walke towards goodnes while the day lasteth, and carefully to put our
hand to the worke, while tyme is fauorable, and the day proper to worke our saluation in.
Whether we be sitting, standing, or walking, euery posture of our bodie represents Eternitie. Sitting should reduce vnto our memorie the emptie Seates of the Angells fallen from Heauen, which remayne for vs to fill and repaire their ruines. And the Seates also prepared for those who are to iudge the world together with our Sauiour. If we stand, let vs thinke of that which the Psalmist saith, we were straight vpon our feete in thy porches o Hierusalem. If we walke, at euery steppe we are to be myndfull to aduance in the way of Hierusalem. And that not to goe forward in the way of God is to goe backward.
In attireing our selues let vs thinke of the Blessed, who are inuested with light, as with a garment: and of those
pure creatures, which in Heauen follow the Lambe where euer he goes, in habites which put downe the snow in whitenesse. O God may we sigh out, when shall we be clad with thy selfe, inuested with IESVS CHRIST, adorned with the wedding garment, and be admitted to the eternall banquet of the marriages of the Lambe.
When we heare the word of God preached vnto vs by the mouth of the Preacher, why should not that word of God, stirre vp our hearts to that God WORD, to that word eternall, an essentiall WORD eternally vttered by the Father, the Splendour of his Father-hoode, Light of Light, Image of his substance, towards that WORD in whom all things were made, and who hath truely the words of life, and life euerlasting. O Diuine, sacred, and essentially eternall WORD, it is of thee as of their true bread, that the Elect
doe feed in Heauen, thou art he, whom they preciously conserue in their heartes. O Truth of God, o God of TRVTH thou remaynst for euer. Heauen and earth shall passe, but this eternall WORD shall neuer passe.
When we assiste in the Diuine Office, and prayse God in the midst of his Temple, why may not we excite our heartes towards that perfect prayse, which God himselfe doth giue vnto himselfe in Eternitie: or to that which the Angells and Elect doe render vnto him in Heauen, when they call him thrice, HOLY, in so graue a tune, and so full a musike, that the gates of Heauen are moued in it. Benediction, praise, and vertue be to him who is seated vpo^ the Throne, and to the Lambe, who hath redeemed vs in his blood, fro^ euery Tribe, people, and nation, and hath placed vs in his eternall
Kingdome. But principally when we are present at the CATHOLIKE SACRYFICE, wherin the Lambe without spote who takes away the sinnes of the world, is offered to his heauenly Father, in an vnbloodie manner. o God then it is, that we ought with all the Court of the Church Triu^phant, to incens the holy Alter, with ince^se euerlasting in an humbly louing adoration, which ryseth vp as an incense burnt before the face of God. Then it is, that we are to doe our duties to him, who is Preist for euer according to the Order of MELCHISEDECH: and who being an eternall Bishope, not needing to pray for himselfe, yet made his entrie into the Sanctuarie of Eternitie, not by the blood of beastes, but by his owne, offering himselfe vp to his Father an oblation for the sinnes of all mankind.
Like as all things seeme yellow to such as are sicke of the ganders;
and as that which is seene through a coloured glasse, doth appeare to be of the same colour: So when a soule hath accustomed it selfe by frequent aspirations to thinke of Eternitie, euery thing, be it what it will, recalls this Obiect to her memorie. The beautie of Townes and Palaces doth presently represent vnto her the riches of the incomparable Hierusalem, such as it is described in the Apocalipse; and that Palace of the Diuinitie far other then that of DAVID and SALOMON, which the Scripture doth so richly describe. An old Hermite beholding the Romane TRIVMPHES in their magnificall Pompe: what shall the triumphant Hierusalem be, quoth he, if such splendour and glorie be seene euen in earth? O Lord, will we say with the Psalmist, how happie are they that liue in thy house, far beyond those that liue in the Tabernacles of Sinners!
O how goodly are the Tentes of IACOB for euer! how the Mansions in the house of the Heauenly Father, are diuersified, and desireable! How amiable are thy Porches, o Lord God of Vertue's my soule is transported in consideration therof!
These worldly magnificencies which we dayly see, ought to be so many ladders to a good soule, to ascend to those that are eternall, which are onely to be found in his Abode, who is great and laudible in his holy Citie, and his eternall Hill, whose greatnes is infinite. The sight of humane miseries will make the like impressio^ in her by sending her downe to Hell aliue, to behold there, calamities incomparably greater, in their extremitie, and eternall continuance. Yea if she behold malefactours led to execution by humane Iustice, it makes her thinke of the eternall Iustice of God, which is inflicted
vpon the damned, without all hope of ease or deliuerie. Nay if she doe but see a beast die, she is moued to pittie those poore creatures, whose Felicitie expires with their life.
If she take into her consideration the great ones of this world, that which is written occurs vnto her mynd, that the Powrefull shall be powrefully torme^ted. In beholding Kings and Princes she doth rather pittie then enuie their condition, when she calls to mynd, that they shall die like other men. That all their glorie shall passe as the floure of the feild; and that their Diademes and honours of so short standing, hath nothing comparable to that Kingdome, where the King of Kings raignes with his Elect, whom he makes participant of his Royaltie, but a Royaltie that is euerlasting, a Kingdome that knowes no end.

 If she cast her ey downe vpon the poore and litle ones, who are here below the refuse of the world, and the scorne of men, she apprehe^ds them happie, because to them, as to a poore LAZARVS, an eternall Kingdome is promised.
If warre and peace occurre vnto her thoughtes, they doe forthwith draw with them the memorie of both the Eternities. The accursed, where there is a continuall warre without Peace: The Blessed, where there raynes a happie Peace without all feare of warre. Yea hereby, she falls vpon the Essence of that eternally great God, who in the Scriptures, is sometymes styled the God of Peace, sometymes the God of armies, and reuenge.
The sight of the Sea, floodes, riuers, and fountaines, make her remember the same: for she thinkes of the fountaine of Paradice, of the
source of life springing towards Eternitie; she thinkes of the flood of the Citie of God, and of the infinite Ocean of the essentiall Eternitie, of the eternall essence: whose is the Sea, saith DAVID, and who made this vaste receptacle of waters.
In what estate soeuer, a soule that is seasoned with this holy exercise, be, whether in prosperitie or aduersitie, in ioy or greefe, in consolation or desolation, in priuation or fruition, in pleasure or paine, in sicknes or health be she in grace or disgrace with the world, in plentie or want, be it amidst riches, or in the presse of pouertie, all doth cooperate to good. And all this placeth Eternitie before her eyes, beholding the accursed, in afflictions; the blessed, in contentment: and the eternall God in euery thing, and euery thing in the eternall God. To whom keeping an inuariable fidelitie, in the various change
of things, she pronounceth couragiously with the Apostle, whether we liue or die we are our Lord's. I will blesse him at all tymes, his praise shall be continually in my mouth. Whether he draw vs vp to Heaue^, or he depresse vs downe into the Abisses below; whether he doe mortifie, or quicken vs, his loue shall be so strong vnto me (loue which is more strong then death or Hell) that nothing shall euer be able to separate me from his charitie. Yea she will rather be vnmyndfull of her selfe, then forget this deare Hierusalem of that Eternitie, wherin she hath cast the Ankre of all her hopes, and of her saluation. Exercise your selfe therfore frequently and faithfully in this Practise of Aspirations and Iaculatorie Prayers, which are so familiar to all those that professe true pietie: and you will find by experience, that as by meanes therof you come to see God in all
things, so shall you easely discouer therby in euery thing the Blessed or accursed Eternitie (since Fortune and misfortune are the two basons, or rather the two Poles of this life, and the two Caskes or tunns, of Prouidence, according to that auncient Philosophers conceipt) or at least to contemplate therin the essentiall Eternitie, which is God, the Center wherin all our desires and asperations doe end.


The moments wher vpon Eternitie doth depend.
LXXVII.
O God, Athanasia, what am I about to say, this Eternitie which shall neuer haue end, is not yet, in respect of vs, without begining, and it is that which the Diuines call Euiternitie; for God alone, being his owne Eternitie, is
without begining or end. But all other creatures who were made in TYME had a begining; yet true it is that both Angells and men shall be eternall, marrie, in the tyme to come, for they had a begining, and were not from all Eternitie. Now as we haue had a begining, and shall haue no end, (whether our wicked life doe precipitate vs into eternall punishments; or our good endeauours, assisted by God's grace, make vs a way to eternall life.) So our passage to the blessed or accursed Eternitie, depends of a moment as of its principle. O Athanasia, how atte^tiue ought we to be to vnderstand that dreadfull moment whervpon depends our Eternitie. If you aske me which it is, I will discouer vnto you, in the next stroke, that it comprehends all the moments of this mortall life. But as in a plentious heruist, there are alwayes some eares
of come more notable then the rest; and amongst the starrs, those which are neerest the two Poles are the most remarkable; so amongst the moments of which our mortall life are composed, I would wish that we should haue a principall care of the two, of which I am about to speake. The first is the precious moment in which the Diuine grace doth touch our hearts, called by the Scripture the tyme of our visitation, a moment of such importance, that being rightly receaued, it is the blosome of our blessed Eternitie, but being ill managed, it is the begining of our accursed Eternitie. Woe be to thee, said our Sauiour weeping, o Hierusalem, because thou hast not decerned the tyme of thy visitation. O God, Athanasia, how we shall be astonished, when before the Tribunal of the iust Iudge, where we must all appeare, we shall heare our
selues accused of so many negligences, for that we haue ether despised the Diuine inspirations, or that we haue abused so many heaue^ly graces which could haue giuen vs life, if we had bene deade by sinne; or life more abundantly, if we were alreadie in grace; according as it is writte^. How much was that slothfull louer of the Canticles greeued, when she perceaued that her Spouse was past by, who had stood at her Cha^ber doore quaking with cold and beseeching entrie by so many louing inuitatio^s, and aduantagous promisses? She riseth, but to late; she runs full of desolation into diuers places, but fines him not, till after a thousand and a thousand labours, affrontes, and reproches. But what a heart breake shall it be to the reprobate soule, when after her condemnation she shall clearly see, how many occasions of working her saluation she had neglected;
and how many meanes she had to free her selfe from the torments to which she shall see her selfe adiudged for euer? We se^nselesse, say the damned speaking of the Elect, esteemed their life (who wrought their owne saluation) madnes, themselues, dasterous and dishonorable, but now we see, their lot is in the inheritance of Saintes. On the other side, what a consolation shall it be to thee Blessed, when they shall consider, that their well imployed moments of affliction in earth, had wrought in them an eternall waight of Glorie. Let vs, therfore be carefull of our selues, Athanasia, Let vs marke what our Sauiour speakes in our hearts, and doubtlesse we shall vnderstand words of Peace, and reconcilement. Blessed is the man that heareth him, and watcheth at his doores dayly, which we doe, when we are earefull to gather vp his inspiratio^s,
as the dropes of a heauenly dew which begets precious Pearles in our hearts, and the holy vnions of our soule with God. Let's still be on foote, and as it were, stand Sentinell vpon our wayes; let vs thinke in what sort we walke; let vs turne our feete into the Pathes of the Diuine Lawe. The SECOND MOMENT is that which makes a separation betwixt our soule and our body, that is, the instant of our departure out of this life, a moment which is our last, and is to be iudge of all those that went before. For as the Tree remaynes for euer where it falls; so shall we continue for euer in the, state in which we are found in the instant of our death. And such as God shall find vs then, such will he iudge vs. For if all this life be but a waying to Eternitie, death is to be tearmed the doore of Eternitie, yet a double doore, passing the good to
felicitie; the wicked to eternall miseries. And if PHILIPPE MACEDO, to conteyne himselfe within the bounds of temperance and modestie in his Kinglike greatnes, made a Page aduertise him euery morning that he was a Man, and conseque^tly, mortall, least he might haue framed some immortall co^ceipt of himselfe: How much more ought a Christian, continually to call to mynd that double Eternitie, which attends him after death.


The present moment.
LXXVIII.
BVt besides these two moments which I haue proposed vnto you, Athanasia, I doe so much desire that you would attend, and applie your selfe to the consideration of Eternitie, that I would wish from my heart, that all the moments
of your life were imployed in that exercise; that I might applie to you that of the Prophete, you are a nightly Sentinell of this life, and might one day see you, amongst the wise Virgins in the eternall banquet of the marriage of the Lambe. I could wish that at euery breathing, you would cast an ey towards Eternitie; that at euery beating of a pulse, euery thought, word, action, you would make some reflection vpo^ a subiect of such importance. It is said that the weaknesse of Antipheron his sight, making the ayre become as thicke as a mirrour vnto him, made him continually see his owne shape: and I wish to God, that the force of your fight were so persing, that in all things you might behold the picture of Eternitie, according to the methode I haue proposed vnto you. For when all is said, if you desire indeed to know, the moment whervpon
the good or bad successe of your Eternitie depends, I will assure you, it is THE PRESENT MOMENT. Enter therfore into your selfe by a wholsome inuersion, returne into your owne heart, make a visite in the Hierusalem of your interiour man with the lampe of a sincere examen. Consider in what state you stand. Whether you are not in the state of disgrace, and set in the chaire of pestilence, and in the region of the shadow of death and darknes of sinne. Giue eare vnto the voice of grace which cryes out vnto you, ryse thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and CHRIST will illuminate thee: he is the true light which doth illuminate euery man that comes into this world, and he that followes him walkes not in darknes. This Su^ne of Iustice makes his beames shine vpon the good and bad. Open thyne eyes, and receaue his splendour, and be not rebellions
against the light. Why wilt thou perish o house of Israel? approach vnto him who is the light of the world, and thou shalt be enlightened, and thy face shall not he confounded. He shines in euery tyme and place, and none is able to hide himselfe from his heate, or light. He is a Sunne that doth continually send out his rayses, we need onely to open our eyes, and euery moment they shall be filled with light. I stand at the gate, and knoke, saith he, and if any one open vnto me, I will come vnto him, and will take my repose and repast with him, for I will suppe with him, a repast, Athanasia, to which repose doth immediately follow. In euery instant of your life, these words are spoken to your heart. The night is past, the day is come, lets vs cast of then the workes of darknes, and let vs put on the armour of light, that we may honestly walke in the light of Grace.
You know what the Poetes learned fables, teach, touching OCCASION, and how one is to lay hould vpon her, she passeth like lightning, in the twinckling of an eye, and being past, in vaine doe you call, or endeuour to stope her, since she is balde and affords no hold; and withall deafe and inexorable to such as recall her. If you heare me, saith our Lord by a Prophete, you shall eate the pleasant fruites of the earth, but if you heare me not, I will destroy you, and will laugh at your destruction; for I am a strong and iealous God, and make such disdaynefull as disdayne me. When I come to a soule I will be receaued; and when I come in qualitie of Spouse, I desire to be mett; and that my grace be not receaued in vaine. My spirit shall flie the dissembler, and such as doe not receaue him; so as is beseeming that sweete guest of the soule.
And though I operate all the good which is in the soule, yet will I that she cooperate, performing a parte of the way, or at least admitting my fauours into the bosome of her consent, and remembrance. I will giue sight to the blind, but I will also haue them to demand it. I will willingly cleanse the vncleane, yet will I haue her endeuours in recurring to my Goodnes. I will willingly giue the pappe, marrie vpon condition that she shall sucke it. I will freely enlighten, yet will I haue her to receaue my light. I hate those remisse and drowsie soules who prolong their conuersion from day to day, and who of their owne part will doe nothing: for though I created them without them, yet without them will I not saue them. I will create in them a cleane heart, and renew a right spirit in their bowells. I will render vnto them the ioy of my
saluation, and confirme them with my principall Spirit, yet of their part I will haue them to put of their old ADAM, with his ill customes, and put on the new, accompaigned with Iustice, Sa^ctitie, and Truth. Thus it is, Athanasia, that our Sauiour speakes to the soules, which seriously and duely thinke of their co^uersion, and Eternitie. Euery moment he vseth these kind of discourses in the botome of our heart. Lets be good husbands therof. If this day his voice sound in your eares, waxe not hard hearted, for otherwise, if you will not accnowledge his wayes, he will sweare in his wroth, that you shall neuer enter into his eternall Rest. Sluggard how long wilt thou sleepe? how long, o yee heauie hearted, Will you be in loue with vanitie, and seake after a Lie. Are you ignorant that the Goodnes of God, hath long enough expected your repentance; doe you
not know what an auncient Father saith, that the Holy Ghost is an enemye to slothfulnesse and delayes? Doe not delay your conuersion, saith the wiseman, nor deferre it from day to day, least you be preuented by a soudaine death, and wishing for tyme of repentance, you find it not. Who is not to day fit for his conuersion shall be lesse fit to morrow, because one sinne, saith S. GREGORIE, by its owne waight, waighes vs downe to another, one Abisse inuoking another. Know then, Athanasia, that euery moment is proper to conuert our selues vnto God. And what is a true conuersion, but an auersion from the Creature, and a returning towards the Creatour, that is, a contempt of the world which passeth with its concupiscences, and an application of the Spirit to eternall things. So shall euery present moment serue you for a gate, by which you may passe from
TYMES and MOMENTS to ETERNITIE.


The eternall doome.
LXXIX.
ANd here it is, my Athanasia, where I am to imitate the torch, which being vpon the pointe of dying out, casts the greatest light: for before I finish, and put the last fingar to this Draught, I must send out fire and flames: which I will doe, by proposing vnto you, the most forcible and efficacious motiue that ca^ be imagined, to cause you to thinke continually of Eternitie. And what is this sharpe spurre, Athanasia, but the definitiuely eternall Sentence, which the iust Iudge of the liueing and the deade, shall pronounce in his generall Iudgeme^t at Doomes day, when he shall make an eternall seperation betwixt goates and the
Lambes; the choyce wheate and darnell; the wicked and the iust? And if S. HIEROME had so deeply engrauen, in his heart, the memorie of the resurrection of the deade, which shall be performed vpon the sound of the last Trumpet, that at euery moment, whether he waked or slept, he apprehended that he heard that voice of terrour: Rise o yee deade, and appeare before the Tribunall of the liueing God: how much more reason haue we to thinke of the issue and conclusion, then the preparation of this solemne Iudgement, since the sentence doth irreuocably decree what shall become of vs for all Eternitie? Before and aboue all things, said PACOMIVS, let vs keepe before our eyes the last of all the dayes: and all the moments of our life, let vs thinke, and throughly thinke of Eternitie. A remarkable Sentence, and euen worthy to be engrauen with an iron penne, not onely, in a plate of
leade, but in the hardest marble and flinte stone, as said the good IOB. The mother of Simphorian said vnto her sonne while he was haled vnto Martirdome, my deare child, the fruite of my wombe, the beloued of my vowes, turne thyne eyes towards Heauen, consider him that raignes there for euer: renounce him not for a moment of life: the paines of death will quickly be past; but the reward shall neuer end. And S. FRANCIS, to encourage his Religions to the lingering martirdome of a religions life, said vnto them; Bretheren, great are the things which we haue promised vnto God; yet infinitly greater things, God hath promised vnto vs: The labour is short: the reward is eternall. The pleasure doth post by; the paine is permanent. Many are called, few are elected, and euery one receaues according to his workes. But especially at that great day,
which is the iudge of all the rest, euery one shall be rewarded according to his workes; and God shall reueale that which is shut vp in darknes, and shall manifest the secretes of hearts. A day so dreadfull, that the powres of Heauen shall be moued; the Angells shall quake with feare, when the Almightie shall come to iudge the world. It is not my pourpose, Athanasia, to entertayne you with the horrours of that day, which would require a whole volume. I will onely place before your eyes the eternall Ghospell, or rather the irreuocable sentence, which shall proceede from his mouth, who shall iudge the people in equitie, who shall iudge nations; and to whom his Father hath giuen all iudgement in heaue^ and in earth, and which shall issue from thence like lightning and thunder, farre more dreadfull then that which did appeare vpon the
toppe of the mount Sina, when our Lord deliuered his law vnto Israel, by the hand of MOYSES Mediatour betweene God and the people. O Sauiour of the world, thou shalt be then a lambe Dominatour of the earth, to the good; but to the reprobate a roaring Lion. When the Lion begins to roare in the Forrest, there is nether passinger, nor yet wildebeasts, that doe not quake, and hide themselues. O how shall the damned dread thy voice resembling that of thy thunder in the wheele of thy furie, since they shall inuoke the mountaines to fall downe vpon them, to hide them before the face of thy wroth; for who knowes the force of thyne indignation: or who is able to somme vp the effectes therof. How penetrating shall the two edged sword be, which shall proceed from thy mouth, whilst thou shalt thunder out against the^ that eternall
doome, which shall reach euen vnto the diuisio^ of their soule and their spirit, of their ioyntes also and their marowes. GOE YEE ACCVRSED INTO ETERNALL FIRE. O, Athanasia, who is able without astonishment to vtter, without swonding to vnderstand, so dismaying and dreadfull words? Be gone. Alas dread Lord whither shall they goe, to auoyd the encounter of thy spirit, and to conuey themselues from before thy wrothfull countenance? art thou not in Heaue^, in Hell, and euery where? dost thou not euen fill heauen and earth? dost thou not hold the vniuerse in thy hand? and doth not thy powre comprehend all things? Be gone. But to whom shall they betake themselues? art not thou he, who hath the words of eternall life, who art euen thy selfe life euerlasting? Be gone. Whither wilt thou haue those Prodigalls to retire the^selues?
doe what they can, they cannot goe out of thee, since in thee, all things haue motion, beeing, and life. Be gone. But whither shall those ABSALON's resort for succour, being eternally banished from the Court of the eternall DAVID, King of ages, immortall and inuisible? Be gone. O what a word! or rather what a Thunder bolt, able to strike Lucifer downe into the Abisse of Hell! oh Sauiour IESVS! in the day of thy flesh, in the tyme of thy sufferances, when, like an innocent Lambe thou wast lead to be sacryficed, if this word. It is I, was able to prostrate vpon the ground the troopes of Soldiers: How shall that word of reprobation precipitate them, whom thou driuest eternally from the Paradice of thy presence? Be gone. o banishing sword of the Angell of the high Councell: who dost banish for an Eternitie the Betrayers of the heauenly
inheritance! Be gone. o! Athanasia, if the Auncient prophetes were struke with such astonishme^t, while God, appearing vnto them vnder diuers formes, did impart vnto them his will and pleasure, as to his friends, and Embassadours, to be the Interpreters of the same to the people: and if the onely vision of the Angells of light put them into a traunce, as we reade euen of S. IOHN in his Apocalipse, falling prostrate at the feete of the Angell, as though he had fallen downe deade. If Israel, while he heard God thunder and lighten vpon the Mount-Sina, said vnto MOYSES, speake thou vnto vs, and we will vnderstand thee, but let not our Lord speake, least we may dye, and continuing in his apprehension, if we heare any more, said he, the voice of our Lord God, infallibly we are dead (for what flesh is able to susteyne the word of the liuing
God, speaking out of the midst of flames, as we heare him?) how dreadfull I pray you must the condemning voice of the inexorable Iudge needs be? The Prophete ISAYE, seeing, in spirit onely, the destruction of Babylone, was touched with so deepe a compassion, that he affirmed, that his reines were filled with dolour, and his anguish was like to that of a woman in childbirth, that he fell backward in hearing its Condemnation, was troubled in beholding it, withered away with apprehension, and was inuolued in darknesse through amaysement therof. Then, saith the same Prophete, speaking of the last iudgement; the day of the furie of the God of Hostes, shall be terrible to the proud, arrogant, and haughtie. Then, saith IEROMIE, they shall be confounded who not haue considered that eternall reproach. Then,
goes on ISAYE, The Almightie will make the Maiestie of his voice be heard, and will manifest the fearefull force of his arme, in the consummation of his wroth, and in the flame of deuouring fire. For euen as a fire, saith the Psalmist, which burneth a woode, and as a flame that burneth the mountaines; so shalt thou pursue them in thy tempest, who shall be the obiect of thy wrath. Then, the Almightie, saith the wiseman, by his owne vertue, shall trample vnder his feete the necke of the proud and powrefull. Be gone accursed. O God! what a second thunder bolt shall fall vpon the heades of the Reprobate, by this eternall curse: a curse, which doth comprehend in it selfe, in an emine^t manner, all the torments, which euerlastingly they are to endure in Hell. Be gone thou accursed figue tree. Be gone barre^ trees, twise deade, rooted out of the blessed earth, and
are onely fitt to be cast into the fire. Be gone, you are not worthy to take vp place, in the garden of my delightes: where I plante none but trees that beare good fruite. Goe you accursed into eternall fire. Goe into deuoureing flames: take vp your Abode in eternall fires. The blast of my wroth shall kindle the brimstone of the furnace, wherin you burne, as long as I shall be God. Athanasia, I leaue to your meditation, the rest of this horrible sentence, which in the twinkling of an eye shall be put in execution, ingeniously confessing vnto you, that my quakeing pen doth fall from its flight; as did the birds of old, which flew ouer the accursed lake of Pentapolis. But lets turne our eyes from this tragicall spectacle, let's giue an attentiue eare to the sweete voice of the Spouse of the elected foule. o how delightfull shall this voice be, and how iustly
may the Elect say with the Psalmist, o how sweete is thy word, o Lord, to our taste, yea, it is more sweete then the honie combe. Loe here the sentence of their eternall felicitie. Come o what an actractiue word is this, able euen to draw out of the Abisse of nothing, that which yet hath no beeing, sith God doth call that which is not as that which is, giueing beeing to that which is not, by his powerfull word. Come. With what promptitude shall the Elect spring vp into the ayre, to present themselues before their Spouse, and to obey his blisfull co^mands, wholy to be desired, yea the crowne and accomplishment of all their desires. Though they were as vnsensible as iron, this lodestone will draw them, II, it will draw them after it selfe in the sweete odour of this inuitation. Come. This word doth intimate a perfect vnion of grace and Glorie,
which shall transforme the Blessed into God, participating of his felicitie, and shall translate them into the inheritance of the children of the eternall Father. Come yee blessed, o benediction far passing that of the old Patriarkes, and which conteynes in it the fatnes of the wishfull soyle, and all the dewe of Heauen, quite putting downe the dewe of Hermo^, which doth disperse it selfe all ouer the Mountaine of Sion. O how blessed are they who are blest by our Lord who made Heauen and earth: They shall dwell for euer in the Land of Promise, a Land of benediction, freed from all captiuitie by the presence of our Lord. A Land which doth flow with the milke and honie of Diuine blessings; a Land abu^ding with the bread of Angells, with heaue^ly Manna, where the Elect possest of a constant peace, shall enioy a plentuous repose. In this happie day,
alloted for Iustice and Mercy, an inuariable plentie of Peace shall befall the Iuste, and the Moone of change shall be taken away. Here it is, Athanasia, that I would inuite you to ruminate with me, that Diuine sallie of loue and desire of the greate S. AVGVSTINE. Bring to passe that I may loue thee o Lord, and if I loue thee not yet enough, effect that I may loue thee more. Certes, it is not possible for me to know, in what measure I want necessarie loue; this onely I know, that all plentie which is not my God, is to me meere miserie and want. O how happie is he, saith the Psalmist, who hath his desires filled with him. And who indeed can be said to be compleatly rich, but he that is saciated with his glorie, and inebriated with the abundance of the delightes of his house. Come yee blessed of my Father and receaue the Kingdome prepared for you from the begining of the world. O
what a Kingdome! o what a crowne! Crowne of gold, beset with signes of sanctitie, glorie, and honour, liueries of vallour! Come my beloued, saith he to those elect soules, come and you shall be crowned. This eternall and infinitly happie Kingdome, saith S. ISIDORVS, in what euer respect it be considered, is promised to all kind of people; and yet, (o humane blindnesse!) few speake of it, few thinke of it, and that but rarely too. Worldly entertayneme^ts are stuffed with friuolous and impertinent discourses: rarely doe we heare any newes of Heauen and that heauenly life which shall neuer haue end. This is a miserable straying from the right way. Our life is lent vs to breath after Eternitie. Nor it is sutable to the condition of a Christian to hope for any glorie or felicitie which is not eternall. Those that doe vndertake any lo^g voyage,
or famous pilgrimage, as that of the Holy La^d, doe entertayne the^selues in the way with on other thought, then that of the place whither they tend, solacing their wearinesse with the sweet memorie of that which they hope to see there. O Athanasia, what ought we to doe in this sade exile (where we are Pilgrimes and Passingers, after the manner of our fore-fathers, where we wander and stray from God) but to place our thoughtes vpo^ the Contrie whither we trauell, vpon the Citie of permanent abode, whither we breath, and to refresh our labours by the blessed hope of the wished period of our pilgrimage: and withall to imitate the Traueller (who conte^ting him selfe vpon the way with pure necessaries, holds on without stop or stay, or looking backward) making vse of temporall things onely, to aduance vs in our way to
Eternitie. O how full of glorie is this Kingdome, sings the holy Church, where all the Saintes doe raigne with God. And who will giue force to the wings of our desires, to ayme and fly towards this marke, during the whole course of our mortall life: a happie course, if it arriue at so wishfull an end. But now it is high tyme, that to free our pencill we giue the last touch to this Draught by an


Adoration of the essentiall Eternitie.
LXXX.
O Great God! Eternall Esse^ce! ESSENTIALL ETERNITIE! why, it is thee in fine, which before and aboue all things, I desire, and seeke for. And if I aspire after the Blessed Eternitie, the reaso^ is, because it is no other thing then thy selfe, who art, and who doth make eternall life, which without
thee and out of thee, would nether be desireable nor estimable. Behold all my desire is before thee, and I powre out my prayer in thy presence, which hath no other ayme but inseparably and eternally to vnite my selfe vnto thy Goodnesse, to hold it, and neuer to be separated from it, to seeke thy face, to search for thy faire countenance, the onely Obiect of myne eternall felicitie. Giue thy selfe vnto me, o my God: behold I loue thee, and giue thee my whole heart. Thou desirest not the man but for his heart; nor the heart but for loue; nor loue, but to communicate thy goodnes to a reasonable creature, and by such communication to make it eternally happie. Thou wouldst, o Lord, haue me aspire after this communication, the toppe of our soueraigne Beatitude, when thou commandst me to pray vnto thee that thy Kingdome come. It
is this onely thing, which I begge of thy bountie, that I may dwell with thee, that is to say, in thee, for all Eternitie. I loue the beautie of thy house which is no other then thyne owne essence, and the sole ayme of my desires, is the place of thy glorie. Let me rest therin for euer and euer, and according to my election and dilection let me dwell there euerlastingly. Yet that I may enter thither according to thy pleasure o my GLORIE, o my MERCY, o my God, my Light, my Saluation! Loe how I lay downe all my pretentio^s and proper interests at the Gate of thy holy Sion, renouncing from my very heart the spirit of bondage and seruile feare, which would make me flie the accursed Eternitie for no other reason, (o disaster!) then that I should be ther the eternall Obiect of thy wroth, and hatred: renou^cing also that mercenarie spirit, which
would make me wish for the Blessed Eternitie for other ends, then to loue, blesse and praise thee therin for euer. No Lord, I will haue no other motiue to loue, and looke after thee, then thy selfe, who art soueraignely amiable and desirable. I will behold thee directly in thy selfe, and applie my selfe entirely vnto thee, because thou art my God, and because o my deare God, thou art what thou art. Thou art all my riches, all my pretentions; for that I know in seeing thee, I shall see, and possesse in thee all good things. Thou thy selfe art the reward of euery good worke: and he is vnworthy of all laurells, who seekes for any other but thy selfe; for thou art a far more ample recompe^ce to those ^hat loue thee, then man is able to conceaue. It is to thee then alone, o Diuine Eternitie, o eternall Diuinitie, that I consecrate all my desires,
all my thoughtes. It is to thee, o eternall Beeing, that I consecrate all my beeing, in tyme and Eternitie. It is to the Trinitie of thy Diuine Persons, to whom I dedicate the three powres of my soule. To the ADORATION of thy powrefull fecunditie I consecrate my MEMORIE o eternall Father. To thy WISDOME, o eternall Sonne, begotten of the Father by his vnderstanding, I dedicate my VNDERSTANDING. To thee, o HOLY GHOST, the reciprocall Loue of the Father and the Sonne proceeding from their one will, I offer vp my will. O Father of light, grant me the LIGHT of thy Glorie, that one day I may clearely see, that which I now beleeue by the light of FAITH. O eternall WORD bestow thy selfe vpo^ me, that I may possesse in Heauen, that which I seeke by HOPE. O Holy Ghost, make me partaker of thyne infinite BEAVTIE,
to th'end I may one day enioy that which now I imbrace by CHARITIE. Yes Lord I am wholy thyne, be thou also wholy myne, and receaue me according to thy word, and let me not be confounded in my expectation. Thou art myne Eternitie, like as thou art my saluation and my hope. Thou art the onely Eternitie which I pretend; grant that I may prayse thee euerlastingly, and according to thy word, espouse my soule in a liuely Faith, espouse it for euer: For with all the sinceritie of heart, and puritie of intention, that I can possibly conceaue and speake, I giue thee this assurance of my fidelitie by a solemne protestation in the words of the Diuine Psalmist. No Lord I will nothing nether in Heaue^ nor earth but thy selfe: for thou art the God of my heart, and the onely part which I pretend in the Eternitie of Eternities.
FINIS.


