Geographie delineated forth in two bookes Containing the sphericall and topicall parts thereof, by Nathanael Carpenter, Fellow of Exceter Colledge in Oxford. Carpenter, Nathanael, 1589-1628? Geographie delineated forth in two bookes Containing the sphericall and topicall parts thereof, by Nathanael Carpenter, Fellow of Exceter Colledge in Oxford. Carpenter, Nathanael, 1589-1628? The second edition corrected. The Analysis of the first Booke. Geography, whose obiect is the whole earth, is ei∣ther Sphericall, which is two-fold either Primary, which con∣siders the Terrestriall Spheare either as it is Naturall wherein are to bee conside∣red two things: the Principles whereof it consists, to wit, Matter and Forme. Chapter 1. Proprieties arising out of them; which a∣gaine are either Reall: such as are assig∣ned in res∣pect of the Earth it selfe: which are ei∣ther Elementary: as the conformity of all the parts concurring to the constitution of the Spheare. Chapter 2. Magneti∣call; which are either Partiall as the Coition, Direction, Variation, Declination: Chap. 3. Totall: as the Verticity and Re∣uolution: Chap. 4. Heauens: wherein we treate of the Site, Stability, and propor∣tion of the Earth in respect of the Heauens. Chap. 5. Imaginary: such as are the Circles and Lineaments of the Globe, of whose Inuention and Expression. Chap. 6. Artificiall: in the Artificiall Spheare representing the Naturall vnto vs: which is either Common or Magneticall. Chap. 7. Secondary, which handles such matters in the Spheare as se∣condarily arise out of the first. Such are Measure of the Earth, with the diuerse manner of Inuention. Chap. 8. Distinction which are either Spaces con∣sidered Simply in themselues, in which sort they are diuided into Zones, Cli∣mates, and Parallels. Chap. 9. In respect of the Inhabitants: which suffer manifold Distinction. Chap. 10. Distances which are either Simple: wherein is considered the Longitude & Latitude of places. Chap. 11. Comparatiue: wherein two places differing either in Longitude or Latitude, or both, are considered. Chap. 12. Topicall Libro 2 o . To my Booke. PArue, nec inuideo, sine me (Liber) ibis in Aulam, Hei mihi quòd Domino non licetire tuo. Goe forth thou haplesse Embrion of my Braine, Vnfashion'd as thou art; expresse the straine And language of thy discontented Sire, Who hardly ransom'd his poore Babe from fire, To offer to the world and carelesse men The timelesse fruits of his officious pen. Thou art no louely Darling, stampt to please The lookes of Greatnesse ; no delight to ease Their melancholy temper, who reiect As idle toyes but what themselues affect. No lucky Planet darted forth his Rayes To promise loue vnto thy infant-dayes: Thou maist perhaps be marchandize for slaues. Who sell their Authors wits and buy their graues: Thou maist be censur'd guilty of that blame, Which is the Midwifes fault, the Parent's shame: Thou maist be talke for Tables, vs'd for sport At Tauerne -meetings, pastime for the Court : Thou maist be torne by their malicious phangs, Who nere were taught to know a Parents pangs. How eas'ly ca roud Ignorance out-stare The co eliest weeds thy pouerty can weare; When all the Sisters on our Isis side Are of sworne seruants to aspiring pride, And our r owned Mother Athens groanes To see her garden set with Cadmus sonnes: Whose birth is mu uall strife: whose destiny Is onl to be borne, to fight, and dy. Prometheus is chain'd fast, and cannot moue To steale a little fire from mighty Ioue To people new the world; that we may see Our Mother teeme with a new progenie; And therefore with thy haplesse Father proue To place thy duty where thou findest loue. When thou arriu'st at Court thou long may'st stay Some Friends assistance to prepare thee way; As in a clowdy morning I haue done When enuious Vapours shut me from the Sunne. When all else enter, see thou humbly stand To begge a kisse from thy Moecenas hand; If he vouchsafe a looke to guild thy state, Proclayme him Noble, thy selfe fortunate. GEOGRAPHIE: THE FIRST BOOKE. CHAP. I. Of the Terrestriall Globe, the matter and forme. 1 G EOGRAPHIE is a science which teacheth the descrip∣tion of the whole Earth. The Nature of Geographie is well expressed in the name: For Geographie resolued according to the Greeke Ety∣mologie, signifieth as much as a des∣cription of the Earth; so that it differs frō Cosmographie, s a part from the whole. Forasmuch as Cosmographie according to the name, is a description of the whol world, cōprehending vnder it as well Geographie, as Astronomie. Howbeit, I confesse, that amongst the ancient Writers, Cosmographie hath been taken for one & the selfe-same science with Geographie ; as may appeare by sundry treatises meerely Geographicall, Ptolom. ge∣ogr. l. 1. sec. 1. yet intituled by the name of Cosmographie. This Science (according to our appro∣ued Ptolomie ) is distinguished from Chorographie foure wayes. First, because Geographie describeth the whole Spheare of the Earth, according to its iust quantity, proportion, figure, and dis∣positions, which the principall parts of it haue; as well in respect of one another, as of the whole Terrestriall Globe: so that it on∣ly vndertakes the chiefe and most noted parts, such as are sines, creekes, nations, cities, promontories, riuers, and famous moun∣taines. But the Chorographer separatly handleth the lesser parts, and matters of smaller moment, such as are hillocks, brooks, lakes, townes, villages, and Parishes, without any respect at all to the places adioyning, as conferring them with the Sphaericall fabricke of the whole Earth: Which by the same Author is well illustrated by an example, drawne from the Painters Art: For wee see that a Painter, desirous to draw out and represent the head of any liuing creature, will first draw out the lineaments of the first and greatest parts; as the eyes, eares, nose, mouth, forehead, and such like; only caring that they may challenge a due and iust proportion and symmetrie one with the other, not regarding the lesser particles and ornaments in each of these, wanting perhaps space competent to accomplish it. But if the same Painter would striue to expresse only an eye, or an eare, he might take space enough to designe out euery smaller linea∣ment, colour, shadow, or marke, as if it were naturall: for in this he cares not to make it correspondent to the whole head, & o∣ther parts of the body: So happens it to the Geographer, who willing to delineate out any part of the Earth, (as for example, our Realme of England ) he would describe it as an Iland, en∣compassed round with the sea, & figured in a triangular forme, only expressing the principall and greater parts of it. But the Chorographer vndertaking the description of some speciall and smaller part of England ; as for example, the City of Oxford, descends much more particularly to matters of small quantity and note: such as are the Churches, Colledges, Halls, Streets, Springs; giuing to each of them their due accidents, colours, li∣neaments, and proportion, as farre forth as Art can imitate Na∣ture. Neither in this kind of description needs there any con∣sideration of the places adioyning, or the generall draught of the whole Iland. The second difference betweene Geographie and Chorographie assigned by Ptolomie, consists in this; that Choro∣graphie is commonly conuersant in the accidentall qualities of each place, particularly noting vnto vs, which places are bar∣ren, fruitfull, sandy, stony, moist, dry, hot, cold, plain, or moun∣tainous, and such like proprieties. But Geographie lesse regar∣ding their qualities, inquires rather of the Quantities, measures, distances, which places haue aswell in regard one of the other, as of the whole Globe of the Earth: assigning to each region its true longitude, latitude, clime, parallell, and Meridian. 3 ly , Geo∣graphie and Chorographie are said to differ, because Geographie stands in little need of the Art of Painting, for as much as it is conuersant the most part about the Geometricall lineaments of the Terrestriall Globe, clayming great affinity with the Art called of the Greekes, Ichnographie ; whose office is to expresse the figure and proportion of bodies, set forth in a plain superfi∣cies. But contrariwise Corographie requires, as a help necessary, the Art of Painting; forasmuch as no man can fully and perfectly expresse to the eye the true portraict of cities, townes, castels, promontories, and such other things, in their true colours, liuely∣hood, and proportion; except they bee skilled in the Art of Painting. So that this part is by some likened to that Art which the Greekes call Sciographie, or S enographie. Fourthly, and last∣ly, Geographie is distinguished from Chorographie, in that the former considering chiefly the quantity, measure, figure, site, & proportion of places, as well in respect one of the other, as of the Heauens, requires necessary helps of the Sciences Mathemati∣call, chiefly of Arithmeticke, Geometrie, and Astronomie, without which a Geographer would shew himselfe euery-where lame & impotent, being not able to wade thorough the least part of his profession: whereas a man altogether vnpractised in those fa∣culties, might obtaine a competent knowledge in Chorography. As we find by experience, some altogether ignorant in the Ma∣thematicks; who can, to some content of their hearers, Topogra∣phically, and Historically discourse of Countries, as they haue read of in books, or obserued in their trauaile. Notwithstanding all these differences assigned by Ptolomie, I see no great reason why Chorography should not bee referred to Geography; as a part to the whole; forasmuch as the obiects on which hee hath grounded his distinction, differ only as a generall and a speciall; which being not opposite, but subordinate (as the Logicians vse to speake) cânnot make two distinct Sciences, but are redu∣ced to one and the selfe-same: at least the differences thus assig∣ned, will not be Essentiall but Accidentall. Wherfore my scope in this Treatise shall bee to ioyne them both together in the same, so far forth as my Art and leisure shall be able, to descend to particulars; which being in Chorographie almost infinite, wil not all seeme alike necessary in the description of the vniuer∣sall Globe of the Earth. The name of Geographie thus distingui∣shed, wee define it to be a Science which teacheth the Measure and Description of the whole Earth. It is properly tearmed a Science, because it proposeth to it selfe no other end but know∣ledge; whereas those faculties are commonly tearmed Arts, which are not contented with a bare knowledge or speculati∣on, but are directed to some farther worke or action. But here a doubt seemes to arise, whether this Science be to be esteemed Physicall, or Mathematicall ? Wee answer, that in a Science two things are to bee considered: first▪ the matter or obiect whereabout it is conuersant; secondly, the manner of handling and explication: For the former, no doubt can bee made, but that the obiect in Geographie is for the most part Physicall, con∣sisting of the parts whereof the Spheare is composed: but for the manner of Explication, it is not pure, but mixt ; as in the former part Mathematicall, in the second rather Historicall ; whence the whole Science may be alike tearmed Mathematical & Historicall ▪ not in respect of the Subiect which we haue said to be Physicall, but in the manner of Explication. For the obiect of Geographie (as we haue intimated) is the whole Globe of the Earth: where we are to obserue, that the Earth may bee consi∣dered 3 manner of wayes: First, as it is an Element, out of which mixt Bodies are in part compounded: In which sense it apper∣taines to Naturall Philosophie, whose office is to treat of all na∣turall bodies, their principles and proprieties. Secondly, as it is supposed to be the center of heauenly motions, and so it is vn∣dertaken by Astronomers. Thirdly according to its Sphaericall superficies, as it is proposed to bee measured or described, in which manner it is the subiect of Geographie, so far forth as the parts of it haue a diuerse situation, as well in regard one of ano∣ther, as in respect of the Heauens. Which restriction, although agreeing well to some part of it, will hardly square with all the rest: because many things herein are handled besides the Earths naturall site or position, as hereafter shall be taught. For which cause wee haue rather defined the subiect of Geographie to bee the Earth, so far as it is to bee measured and described, as wan∣ting one word to expresse the whole manner of considera∣tion. 2 Geographie consists of 2 parts, the Spheri∣call, and Topicall: The Sphericall part is that which teacheth the naturall constitution of the Terrestriall Spheare. The common and receiued diuision of this Science amongst Geographers, is into the Generall or vniuersall part; and the spe∣ciall. Which diuision, I dare not vtterly reiect; being strengthe∣ned with the authority of ancient and approued Authors. Yet seems it more aptly to be applyed to the Historicall part, then to the whole Science, as we shall after make apparant. In the mean time the diuision of it into Sphericall & Topicall parts, seemes to be preferred in reason: Forasmuch as the Terrestriall Globe, which we suppose to be the subiect of the Science, is proposed to vs vnder a twofold consideration; first in regard of the Ma∣thematicall lineaments and circles, whereof the Spheare is ima∣gined to consist; out of which wee collect the figure, quantity, site, and due proportion of the Earth, and its parts: Secondly, of the places Historically noted and designed out vnto vs, by certaine names, markes, and characters. The former receiueth greatest light from Astronomie, whence some haue called it the Astronomicall part: The later from Philosophie and Historicall obseruation, being (as we haue said) a mixt Science, taking part of diuers faculties. 3 The Terrestriall Spheare is a globous or round Body, comprehended within the super∣ficies of the Earth and Wate . Some haue nicely distinguished betwixt a Spheare & an Orbe, that a Spheare is a round massie body, contained in one surface, which is conuexe or outward as a Bowle. The other concaue, or hollow, in manner of an Egge-shell emptyed. But this di∣stinction seemes too curious, as sauouring to much of Scho∣lasticall subtility, because the name of Orbe and Spheare are ma∣ny times promiscuously vsed, without difference, amongst good Writers. This Spheare which wee make the subiect of our Sci∣ence, wee call Terrestriall, not because it consists meerely of Earth; (the contrary of which wee shall hereafter shew:) but because the Earth is the chiefest in the composition; whence by a tropicall kind of speech, the whole Globe may bee called Ter∣restriall. 4 The handling of the Terrestriall Spheare is is either Primary, or Secundary. The Primary consists in such affections as primarily agree to the Earth. The Geographicall Affection may be considered two wayes; either simply and absolutely in themselues; or eomparatiuely as they are conferred and compared the one with the other. As for example, the circles of the Spheare, such as are the Parallels and Meridians, may be considered either absolutely in themselues; or comparatiuely as they concurre to the longitude, latitude, di∣stance, or such like accidents, which arise out of the comparison of one Circle with another. 5 The Terrestriall Spheare primarily conside∣red, is either Naturall, or Artificiall. The Na∣turall is the true Globe in it selfe, without i∣mage or representation. 6 Herein againe are to be considered two things; First, the Principles and constitution of the Spheare; Secondly, the Accidents and pro∣prieties: The principles whereof the Spheare is composed are two; viz: Matter and Forme. 7 The Matter is the substance whereof the Spheare is made, viz: Earth, and Water. My meaning is not in this Treatise to handle the nature and propieties of these two Elements, Water, & Earth, farther then may seeme necessary for the Geographicall constitution of the Terrestriall Spheare, leauing the rest to the Naturall Philosopher; because it is supposed that few men vndertake the study of this Science, without some insight in the other. And to speake truth, this begins where the Naturall Philosopher ends. Yet because some light in each learning is necessarily required▪ nd all men are not willing to seeke farther into the grounds of Naturall Philosophie ; it will not seeme altogether impertinent, to lay the foundation farther off, that the building thereon erected may stand surer and stronger. Wherefore taking some begin∣ning from the matter of the Earthly Globe, wee haue distingui∣shed it into Earth, and Water, as those parts whereof the whole Globe is not essentially compounded, as one intire body in it selfe; but rather co ceruated and compacted together, each part retaining its owne nature and proprieties, without any pro∣per mixture. To expresse more fully the constitution of this Spheare, we are here to distinguish betwixt the first and second matter. The first matter was that vniuersall chaos, or masse, out of which, all bodies both Celestiall and Elementary were made and formed, as wee read in the first of Genesis. Which whether it be the same with Aristotle's Materia prima, as some haue ima∣gined, I leaue to others to dispute. The second matter of the Globe is either Proper or Accidentall. The proper we call that whereof the Globe of the Earth most properly consists, such as are the two Elements of Earth and Water. The Accidentall mat∣ter is vnderstood of all other bodies, contained in the superficies of the said Spheare, as Stones, Mettals, Minerals, and such like materials, made of a Terrestriall substance, and engendred in the wombe of the Earth. Concerning the Earth and Water, which we make the most proper and essentiall parts of the Spheare, we will set downe these two Theoremes. 1 In the Terrestriall Spheare is more Earth then Water. The Theoreme may bee proued by sundry reasons drawne from Nature and Experience. Whereof the first may bee taken from the depth of the waters, compared with the whole thick∣nes of the Earth. For the ordinary depth of the Sea is seldome found to be aboue 2 or 3 miles, and in few places 10 furlongs, which make a mile and a quarter. And albeit some late Writers haue imagined the obseruation to be vnderstood only of straight and narrow Seas, and not of the maine Ocean: yet granting it to amount 10, 20, or 30 miles, it cannot reach to so great a quantity, as to come neere the greatnes of the Earth. For the whole circle of the Terrestriall Spheare being 21600 English miles, (allowing 60 English miles to a degree of a greater circle) wee shall find the Diameter to bee about 7200 miles: Whose semi-diameter, measuring the distance betweene the center and the superficies of the Earth, will be 3600 miles. And if any man suppose some of the quantity to be abated, because of the Sphericall swelling of the Water aboue the Earth, whose Circle must be greater than that of the Earth: We answer; first that this may challenge some abatement, but not come neere any equality of the Water with the Earth. Secondly it is to bee ima∣gined that the surface of the Sea, howsoeuer as it is painted in Globes and Charts, it seeme for a great part empty and vnfurni∣shed of Ilands; yet this for the greatest part, seeme rather to bee ascribed to mans ignorance, and want of true discouery, be∣cause many quillets and parcels of land lye yet vnknowne to our Christian World, and therefore omitted, and not figured in ou ordinary Mappes. So wee find a great quantity of Earth which lay hid and vnknowne without discouery, in the daye of Ptolomy, which caused him to contract & curtaile the Earth in his Geographicall descriptions. Which defect hath been since that time supplyed by the industrious trauailes and Nauigations of later time: such as were of Portugals, English, and Hollanders, especially of Columbus the Italian, who (as one wittily allu∣ding to his name) like Noah's Doue plucking an oliue branch from this Land, gaue testimony of a portion of Land as yet vn∣knowne, and left naked vnto discouery. And no question can be made, but a great quantity of land, not yet detected by our Eu∣ropean Nauigators, awaites the industry of this age. To which alludes the Poët in these Verses: Seneca in Medeâ. Act. 2. Venient annis secula seris, Quibus Oceanus vincula rerum Laxet, & ingens pateat tellus, Typhi {que} nouos detegat orbes, Nec sit terris vltima Thule. In after-yeeres shall Ages come, When th'Oecean shall vnloose the bands Of things, and shew vast ample lands; New Worlds by Sea-men shall be found, Nor Thule be the vtmost bound. Another reason to proue the Earth to be greater in quantity, may bee drawne from the mixture of Earth and Water : for if these two Elements should meet in the same quantity, & chal∣lenge an equality; questionlesse the whole Earth would proue ouer-moist, lymie, and vnapt for habitation. Which any man may easily obserue by his owne experience. For let a portion of Earth, & another of Water be mixt together in the same quan∣tity, the whole masse will seeme no other than a heap of mire or slime, without any solid or consisting substance. Moreouer the Water being no other than a thin and fluid body, De gen. & cor. hardly con∣taining it selfe within its own bounds or limits (as Aristotle tea∣cheth vs) must needs require a hard and solid body, whereon to support it selfe, which body must of necessity bee greater in quantity. 2 The Earth and Water together make one Spheare. It may bee probably collected from sundry places of holy Scripture, that in the first Creation, the surface of the Earth; be∣ing round and vniforme, was ouerwhelmed and compassed round with Waters, as yet vnfurnished of liuing Creatures. Se∣condly, it appeares that Almighty GOD afterwards made a se∣paration betwixt the Waters and Dry-Land. This separation (a farre as reason may bee admitted as Iudge) seemes to bee effe∣cted one of these two wayes: Either by giuing super-naturall bounds and limits vnto the Waters, not suffering them to inuade the Dry-land : or els by altering the superficies of the Earth, ca∣sting it into inequall parts, so that some-where, some parts of it being taken away, empty channels or concauities might be left to receiue the Waters; other-where by heaping vp the parts so taken away, whence were caused Mountaines and eminent pla∣ces on the earth. The former of these wayes seemes altogether improbable; forasmuch as it is very vnlikely to imagine, that God in the first institution of Nature, should impose a perpe∣tuall violence vpon Nature, as hereafter in place more conueni∣ent shall bee demonstrated. Wherefore taking the later as more consonant to reason; we shall find that the Water & the Earth separated and diuided, make not two separate and distinct Globes, but one and the same Spheare; forasmuch as the conca∣uities and hollowgapings of the Earth, are euery-where choa∣ked and filled vp with Water, whose superficies is Sphaericall; and therefore helpes, together with the Earth, to accomplish & perfect this Terrestriall Spheare. To confirme which opinion▪ these reasons out of common experience may be alleadged: The first is drawn-from the parts of Earth and Water; For we may euery-where obserue, that a portion of Earth, and another of Water being let fall, will descend in the same right line toward the same center: whence we may euidently conclude, that the Eearth & Water haue one and the selfe-same center of their mo∣tion, and by a consequence conspire to the composition of one and the selfe-same Spheare. Secondly, to a like Arch or space in the Heauens, is found answerable alike Arch in the Terrestriall Globe, whether it bee measured by the Earth or Water: which could not happen, were they not accounted parts of the same Spheare. The third reason may bee drawne from the Ecclipse of the Moone, wherein the part of the Moone shadowed & obscu∣red, is obserued to be one Sphaericall or round-figure. This sha∣dow, by the consent of all Astronomer's is caused by the Terre∣striall Spheare, interposed betwixt the Sun and the Moone, inter∣cepting the Sun-beames, which should illuminate the Moone; and the shadowes imitate the opacous bodies, whence they a∣rise: But in the Ecclipse we find only the shadow of one body or Spheare, and therefore according to the ground of the Opticks, we may conclude the body whereof such a shadow proceedeth, to be but one and the selfe-same Spheare. 8 The Forme of the Terrestriall Spheare, is the naturall Harmony or order, arising from the parts working together. We ought here to remember what we said before; that the Earth and the Water concurre together to make one Terrestri∣all Spheare : wherefore the whole being accounted one coacer∣nated and collected Body, made of two other; we are not to ex∣pect an Internall, Essentiall, and Specificall Forme, such as Ari∣stotle recounts amongst the principles of a Naturall Body: but only such a one as in it self is Externall and Accidentall ; yet con∣curring (as it were) Essentially to the constitution of the Terre∣striall Spheare, whose Fabricke and first composition, cannot well be vnderstood without it. Some haue imagined the whole Globe of the Earth to bee informed with one Internall and Es∣sentiall Forme; which opinion seemes to haue much affinity with that of Plato's, concerning the Soule of the World: Not that Plato and his followers were so absurd to defend, that the World with all his parts was animated with a true vitall Soule, in the nature of a liuing Creature: but that all the members of it were vnited together, quickned, and disposed by a certaine Energeticall power or vertue, which had great resemblance and representation of the Soule of man. Which assertion seemes to be restored and embraced by our late Magneticall Philosophers, whose opinion we shall discusse and examine hereafter in place conuenient. In the meane time, grounding our discourse on knowne principles; we can admit no other Forme in the Spheare of the Earth, then the mutuall Harmony, order and concent of the parts, concurring together, and working the perfection & perpetuation of the whole. A fit resemblance whereof we may obserue in an artificiall Clock, Mill, or such like great Engine, wherein euery part duly performing its owne office, there will arise and result a naturall Harmony, whch not vnaptly may bee termed the Forme of the whole Engine. Why the World should not consist of an Internall and Essentiall Forme, sundry reasons haue been alleadged by our common Philosophers : First, because Nature neuer attempteth any thing in vaine, or without a de∣terminate end; But the particular Formes of speciall Bodies (say these Philosophers ) are sufficient for the vnity and conformati∣on of this Terrestriall Globe : so that to grant an vniuersall Forme of the whole, were to multiply causes without any necessity, & make Nature the Mother of superfluity, which to all Philoso∣phers seemes most absurd. Secondly, if this were admitted; the whole Spheare of the Earth would bee as one continuate Body, whose parts should (as it were) suffer a fellow-feeling one of the other. Thirdly, it were a difficult matter to assigne, to what kind such a Forme might be reduced, whether Animate, or In∣animate. If Inanimate, whether it were simple, or compound. If Animate, whether Vegetatiue, Sensitiue, or Rationall ; vnder the which are couched many great difficulties, as yet vndisclo∣sed. Whether these reasons bee of any great force to ouerthrow the aduerse opinion, I leaue it to further inquiry: intending here a Geographicall, not a Physicall Discourse. CHAP. II. Of the conformity of parts in the constitution of the Terrestriall Spheare. 1 IN the former we haue treated of the Natu∣rall constitution of the Terrestriall Spheare, aswell in Matter as Forme: It is needfull in the next place to treat of such Affections and proprieties as nece sarily arise out of such a Constitution. 2. Those Affections or Proprieties are of two sorts, Reall or Imaginarie ; Reall I call such as agree to the Terrestriall Globe by Nature▪ Imaginary, such as agree to it by vertue of our vnderstan∣ding. 3 Againe the Affections Really or Naturally a∣greeing to the Terrene Spheare, are assigned either in respect of the Earth it selfe, or in res∣pect of the Heauens. 4 These Affections are said to agree to the Earth in respect of it selfe, which may be expressed and vnderstood without any comparing of it with the celestiall Bodies. 5 These againe are twofold; either Elemen∣tarie, or Magneticall. Elementary I terme such as haue commonly been knowne or ob∣serued by ordinary Philosophers. Here is chief∣ly to bee considered the conformity of the Terrestriall parts, in the making and constitu∣tion of the whole Spheare. In the former Chapter we haue shewed, that the Forme of the Terrestriall Spheare, is nothing els but the concinnity and apt conspiration of the parts whereof the whole is compoun∣ded. This conformity being diuers and manifold, as well in re∣gard of the parts conforming themselues, as the manner; of the conformity, we shall particularly and distinctly treat of, so far as appertaines to a Cosmographer. Here by the way I cannot but taxe some defect in most of our common Cosmographers, who taking the Sphaericall roundnes of the Earth for a granted supposition, are nothing curious to search into the first grounds and causes of this rotundity, whereby it first became a globous Body; and afterwards retaines in it selfe a Naturall vigour or power (if any violence should be offered) to restore her selfe to her former right and perfection. All which are very pleasant & profitable, to giue an industrious Learner some satisfaction. To explaine this before we descend to particulars, we will lay this ground and Theoreme; 1 The parts of the Terrestriall Spheare, doe natu∣rally conforme and dispose themselues, aswell to the production and generation, as to the conti∣nuance and preseruation of it. The forme of the Terrestriall Spheare, albeit (as wee haue shewed) it be Externall in respect of the whole Globe: yet may we call it naturall ; forasmuch as it issueth and ariseth from the naturall disposition and inclination of all the parts. To vnder∣stand which clause the better, wee are to consider that a thing may bee called Naturall two manner of wayes: first in regard of the primary intent of Nature; as the neerest and immediate end or scope to which shee is directed. Secondly, in respect of her secundary intent or purpose, as that which must of necessity follow the former. True it is that euery Terrene Body, accor∣ding to Natures first intention, seeks and works it's owne per∣fection and conseruation. Neuerthelesse according to her secun∣dary Intent, it concurres to the perfection and good of the whole vniuerse; which we shall plainely see in a stone or clodd of earth; which separated and remoued from it's mother, the Spheare of the Earth, by his descent and falling downewards, seeks first his owne conseruation, by reuniting it selfe to the Earth whence it was taken: Secondly, of the whole Globe of the Earth, which by this vnion and addition, no doubt, is made more compleat and perfect. This conformity of the Terrestriall parts, out of which ariseth the Earths Sphaericity ; I call the natu∣rall inclination they haue to moue and settle themselues in such a site or position, as may bring forth a Sphaericall consistency: so that if it were possible (as what cannot be to Gods Almighty power?) that the whole Globe of the earth were dissolued and rent into little peeces; yet were that vigor and motiue inclina∣tion remaining in the parts, whereby they might settle and con∣forme themselues to the same Sphaericall nature, and compositi∣on which it formerly enioyed. For all the parts thus supposed to be distracted, would (no question) meet together & conforme themselues to the same point or Center; and so equally poising themselues, would restore the same Spheare so dissolued. So that wee here note a double inclination and motion of earthly bodies; first by a Right line, of the parts tending towards the Center; the other Sphericall of the whole Spheare, whereof the first in nature preceedes the composition of the Spheare, the other followes. But this latter motion I leaue doubtfull, till place conuenient. 6 The conformity of the Terrene parts is two∣fold; Primarie, or Secondary. The former is that whereby all earthly bodies are by a right line carried and directed to the Center of the Terrestriall Globe. As in an Artificiall Spheare or circle, drawne by a Geome∣trician, their principall parts are expressed, to wit, the Center, Ray, and circumference: so in the Naturall Globe of the Earth, these three, as it were Naturally & Really discouer themselues vnto vs. For first there is set a fixt point, to which all heauy bo∣dies moue and conforme themselues. Secondly, there is set the line or Radius, in which such bodies are carryed and conueyed. Thirdly, the confluence of all these parts, begets the roundnesse and Sphaericall forme. To begin first with that which is first in nature, we will take these grounds. 1 All Earthly Bodies incline and approach to the Center as neere as they can. This proposition so farre forth as it concernes the two Ele∣ments of Earth and Water, is confirmed by common experience, and therefore needs no long demonstration. For we see plainly, that not only these two doe incline (as much as may be, all ob∣stacles being remoued) to the Center of the Earth; but also all mixt bodies compounded of them, being ouerswayed with the most predominant element, doe challenge to thēselues the same motion. I say not that all these Terrestriall bodies driue & mee in the Center (for that were impossible, that all this massy Spheare should bee contracted to one point) but that all the parts haue a mutuall inclination to approach as neere the Cen∣ter, as the necessity of the place, and the concurrence of them amongst themselues will suffer. By these Terrestriall Bodies which inioye this motion and inclination, wee vnderstand first the two Elements of Earth and Water, with all other bodies arising out of their mixture. To these I may adde the Ayre, which by reason of his affinity with the Earth and Water, and naturall cōformity to the same Center, we may well tearme an earthly body. It is commonly reported that the Ayre is l ght, and therefore carried vpwards, not inclining at all to the Cen∣ter of the Terrestriall Globe; as the parts of these two Elements are. But this assertion, although bolstred vp, both with antiqui∣ty and authority; I take either to bee false, or misunderstood, and that I speake no more herein than I can proue; I will pro∣duce some reasons (strong enough, as I thinke) to perswade that the Ayre is a heauy body, hauing a due inclination and confor∣mity to the Center of the Earth: First therefore will I produce this experiment. When a Well or deepe Trench is digged vp in the earth, I would willingly demand whether the Aire des∣cends to fill up this Trench or concauity; or else a void space is left vnfurnished of any naturall body to fill it? If they admit the latter, they will consequently bring in againe that vacuum, or void space which Arist. and all sound Philosophers haue long since proscribed the confines of nature. If they affirme the for∣mer, that the Ayre descends to fill vp this empty space, I will aske againe, whether this descent of the Ayre be violent or naturall: If they say Naturall, they admit our assertion, that the Ayre na∣turally descends towards the Center, and so by consequence that it is heauy and not light by nature. Neither according to our Peripateticall -Philosophy can wee ascribe more than one moti∣on to the Aire, because it is a ground generally receaued among Aristoteleans : that One simple body can claime but one simple motion: much lesse one simple forme, as that of the Aire, can produce two opposite and contrary motions, such as are Ascent and Descent of the same body. If they chance to light on the o∣ther member of our distinction, and say that the motion of the Aire in this sort is violent, it must needs follow, that it must haue some externall cause or principle whence it should pro∣ceed; because all such motions proceed from externall causes. But here no such cause can be assigned: For the cause would bee either the Earth which is so made hollow, or the emptinesse, or vacuum, or at least the other parts of the Aire. That it is not the Earth, may be proued; first because no Philosopher hath e∣uer shewed any such Attractiue power to reside in the Earth, but rather the contrary; because the Earth and Ayre by most haue beene thought opposite in nature, and repugnant one to the other. Secondly, because Philosophy teacheth, that no agent can worke vpon a separate and distinct patient, except there be a meeting of the Agent and Patient in some meane▪ But here in this supposition, the Earth is imagined to drawe and attract the Aire, which as yet it toucheth not. That this externall cause is not the Vacuum or Emptinesse, is plaine; because it was ne∣uer granted to haue any being or existence, much lesse any cau∣sality in nature. Some perhaps will say, that not the vacuum it selfe, but the euitation and auoiding it, is the cause of the mo∣tion. I deny not but this may in some sort be interpreted a cause, but the doubt is not answered: For wee seeke not a Finall but an Efficient cause; and a curious searcher into Nature, will hard∣ly rest in a meere finall cause. For the finall cause, so farre forth as it is a cause preceding the effect, can no otherwise bee con∣ceiued than in the intention of the Agent: then must enquiry bee made againe what the Agent should bee, and so will the probleme rest vncleered. 1. Because one parcell of the Aire could not moue another, except the same were first moued it selfe, and so a new Agent must of necessity bee found out. 2 The Agent and the thing moued or Patient, ought to bee two sepa∣rate and distinct bodies: But the parts of the ayre meeting to∣gether, become one continuate body. No shift is there left for these Philosophers but one distinction, wherein they distinguish betwixt the Vniuersall and Speciall forme, The Aire, as they affirme, according to his Speciall forme, asc nds vpward from the Center of the Earth : yet by the Vniuersall, for the conser∣uation of the whole vniuerse, it may sometimes suffer a contra∣ry motion, as to moue downeward toward the Center. In which distinction they suppose they haue cut the throat of all contra∣ry reasons. But who so vnderstands himselfe, shall finde it but as a weake reed, to hurt his hand which rests on it: for a second enquiry will bee made, what this vniuersall forme should bee. For by it they vnderstand of necessity either an Internall forme or Nature; or an Externall resultancie and harmony of the parts, such as wee haue described in the first Chapter of this booke. If they vnderstand this latter, it cannot any way bee a cause of this motion; because it followes and ariseth out of this motion concurring with the rest, and no way preceeds it: wher∣as on the contrary part euery cause is to goe before his effect: Secondly, this vniuersall forme or nature compared with the speciall, there would arise a Subordination, and not a Coordina∣tion, or opposition; forasmuch as the speciall is subordinate to the generall or vniuersall. But subordinate causes can produce no other than subordinate eff ts. But here we see the effects or motions to bee quite opposite the one to the other; in asmuch as the motion of Descent in the Aire (which they ascribe to the v∣niuersall forme) is cleane opposite to the motion of Ascent, as∣cribed to the speciall nature. Thirdly, these Philosophers vrging the necessity of Nature to preserue the Vniuerse, are much de∣ceaued in the manner and meanes thereof. True it is that all Earthly and heauy bodies are directed and disposed to the con∣seruation of the earthly Globe. But euery such body (as wee haue shewed before) seekes first the safeguard and preseruation of it selfe, and secondarily by the safeguard of it selfe the preser∣uation of the whole. For how can any part, when it neglects its owne safety, endeauour the preseruation of the whole: sith the whole is but one compounded of many parts. And therefore can it not bee auoided, but that the disorders and disharmony of one part▪ should preiudice and destroy the whole frame. If they turne to the other part, and grant this vniuersall forme to bee Internall, many reasons stand opposite. For first I would de∣mand, whether this vniuersall forme bee simple or compounded. It cannot bee simple, because it would alwayes produce one sim∣ple and vniforme effect: but experience hath t ught the contra∣ry; because wee shall not alwayes find the aire to descend, but sometimes to moue obliquely to the left or right hand, back∣ward and forward; as when it enters into the house by a doore or windowe. On the other side, it cannot well be called a com∣pound forme; because all formes the more vniuersall they are, the more simple they are to be accounted: because the speciall includes more composition than the generall. Moreouer, all compounded substance arise out of simples, which are to bee esteemed first in nature. Secondly, I would aske whether this vniuersall forme bee vna numero, the selfe same indiuiduall in all the parts and bodies; or diuerse, according to the diuersity of the said Bodies. It cannot bee one and the selfe same in all bo∣dies, because, according to the opinion of Aristotle, the whole vniuerse is not one continuate body composed of essentiall parts; but rather a heape or masse collected and digested out of many bodies. Secondly, the forme being thus one indiuiduall, would bee singular or speciall, not vniuersall. If they affirme that this forme is diuerse according to the diuersity of the bodies, it can∣not bee the cause of this motion or descent in the Aire. For this motion (as they suppose) is destined and appointed to no other end, than to comfort Nature in her distresse, when shee stands in feare of rupture or dissolution. But how can this forme being bounded within the limits of the Aeriall superficies perceaue or feele this exigence of Nature in other Bodies? Whatsoeuer they can say in this, is altogether vncertaine, and not warranted by any sound demonstration. A second reason for the naturall des∣cent of the Aire, may bee drawne from a possible supposition; from which wee may enforce a true conclusion. Let vs suppose a portion of Aire by some violence to bee carried aboue his pro∣per orbe; as for example, to the space which by our common Philosophers is ascribed to the Element of Fire, neere the con∣caue superficies of the Moone, I would here demand whether this portion of Aire thus transposed would ascend higher, or descend lower, or rest still in the same place? It could not ascend higher; first because in this wise it should be moued farther out of his owne place, whereas according to the principles of Phi∣losophie, all bodies transposed from their proper places, haue an aptnesse or inclination to returne againe to their proper seats, and not to roue farther off. Secondly, this granted, the Aire should inuade the place of the fire and so the Elements should suffer a confusion; which Aristotle holds absurd. Thirdly, there cannot be imagined in that higher orbe any point or center, to which it should direct his motion; and therefore there is no such motion found; or it must bee very irregular. If on the other side it were granted, that such a portion of Aire so separated, should descend; I aske againe, whether they hold this motion naturall or violent : It cannot bee a violent motion, because it is directed to his owne naturall and proper place; and this motion in the Elements, is alwayes accounted naturall. Last of all, it cannot rest still in the same place, because all bodies forced out of their places (all obstacles being remoued) must needs returne vnto their proper place. Wherefore no other star∣ting hole is here left to our opposites, but that they grant a na∣turall motion, and so consequently yeeld to our assertion. A third reason may here bee drawne from the condensation of the Aire. It is a receiued opinion amongst most Philosophers, that the thinne and subtile parts of the Aire will naturally mount vpward; but the thicker and condensated parts, pitch and set∣tle themselues downeward: Which obseruation, if it bee true, will yeeld vs this conclusion. That the Aire is by nature heauy, and therefore moueth downeward, toward the center of the Sphericall Globe of the Earth. Which I will demonstrate out of these Principles, 1 That that body, which by addition of parts or condensation, is made more heauy or ponderous, must needs haue some weight in it selfe. This may easily appeare, be∣cause the mixture of lightnesse with heauinesse will not intend and encrease the ponderosity, but slacke and diminish it. For the chiefest thing which remits or diminisheth any quality, is the mixture of his contrary, as wee see the quality of cold to be abated and weakened if it entertaine any mixture of heat: 2 The thickning or condensation of any body is made by addi∣tion and coaction of more parts into the same space or com∣passe. As if the Aire or any such like body were thickned, it would confine it selfe to a more narrow roome then before, and so consequenly the narrow roome would containe more parts then before. Out of which wee conclude, that forasmuch as ma∣ny parts pressed together in the same space, make the whole masse more ponderous; these parts so pressed together, must needes haue some waight in themselues. Which may further be illustrated; because the intention of the quality commonly fol∣lowes the condensation of the subiect: Which may easily ap∣peare in red-hot-iron, which burnes and scorcheth more than flame or coales; because euery part hath more degrees or heat. Now where more parts are closely pressed together, the heat must needs bee more feruent. I haue dwelt longer on this sub∣iect, because I would not seeme to broach a new opinion with∣out sufficient reason. To conclude all, and come as neere the re∣ceiued opinion as I can; I will say, that the Aire may bee consi∣dered two wayes; first absolutely in it selfe; secondly in compa∣rison of heauier bodies, to wit, the Earth and Water. In the first sense I grant no absolute lightnesse in the Aire; because out of his naturall inclination, it tends as neere as it can to the center, as all other lower bodies. But if we consider it comparatiuely in respect of other heauier bodies, we may call it light, that is, lesse heauy or ponderous. So that by lightnesse we vnderstand no absolute lightnesse, but a priuation. The summe of all wee haue hitherto proued, is this; That all terrene bodies, as Earth, Water, Aire, and other mixt bodies which concurre to the composition of the Earthly Spheare, as neere as they can, settle and conforme themselues to the center of the Earth; which site or position of them to the center, is their true and naturall place, wherein they seeke their preseruation. 2 Of two heauy Bodies striuing for the same place, that alwaies preuaileth which is hea∣uiest. 3 Hence it comes to passe that the Earth enioyes the lowest place, the next the Water, and the last the Aire. The increment or increase of any effect, must necessarily arise from the greater vigour or efficacy of the efficient cause, as both Reason and Philosophie well teach. Now (as wee haue shewed) all heauy bodyes naturally do descend downeward, out of a naturall inclination they haue to attaine the center: but where there is a greater weight or constipation of ponderous parts in the same masse, there must needs proceede a greater inclination: Supposing then the Earth, Water, and Aire, being three waighty bodies to incline and dispose themselues to their vttermost force to inclose and engirt the center of the Terrestri∣all Spheare; it must needes bee that the Earth beeing the most compact and ponderous, must obtaine the preheminence; next to which succeedes the Water, then the Aire, being of all other the least ponderous. Yet wee deny not but the Water and Aire being setled in this wise, are in their naturall places; which to vnderstand, wee must repeate what we said before, that Nature hath a twofold intention ; the one primary, the other secondary. Indeed if we consider Natures primary or speciall inclination in the bodies themselues, we shall finde them (as wee said) imme∣diatly directed to the center as neere as might bee: but the se∣condary intent of Nature was, that the bodies should so settle and conforme themselues, as that each of them should obtaine a place according to his degree of massinesse and waight. Out of this may bee answered a certaine obiection which some haue produced, to proue the Aire to bee absolutely light in his owne nature. Experience teacheth vs (say these men) that a bladder blowne vp with winde, or an empty barrell being by force kept vnder water▪ the force and obstacle omitted, will suddenly ascend to the top; and that a man ready to sinke in the Water, will not so easily sinke downe while hee can hold his breath: all which effects they ascribe to no other cause, than to inclination of the Aire to moue vpwards from the center. But indeed this motion, howbeit agreeable to the vniuersall nature and consi∣stency of the Spheare, is notwithstanding in respect of the Aire it selfe, vnnaturall and violent; because this ascent of it is not caused by the forme of the Aire, but the interposition of a hea∣uier body striuing for the same place, and so reuerberating it backe from the place, whereunto it tended. For here is to bee imagined, that the bladder or empty barrell drowned in the water, claimes and inioyes for the time that place or distance, which otherwise so much water should occupie; to wit, so ma∣ny inches of feete from one side to the other. No maruell then that obstacles remoued, the Water being most ponderous and waighty, receiues his owne right; and (as it were) shoulders out the Aire, and violently driues it off to his owne habitation. Whence many haue imagined that this motion is proper and naturall to the Aire, when of it selfe it is meerely violent, and enforced by the interiection of another body more waighty and ponderous than it selfe. 7 this conformity of the Terrestriall parts, two things are to bee obserued: 1 The center it selfe: 2 The parts which conforme them∣selues vnto it. The Center is an imaginary point in the midst of the Terrestriall Globe, to which all the parts are conformed. The Fathers of the Mathematicall Sciences, haue laboured to deriue all their doctrine from a point, as the first and most simple principle whereon all the rest depend. Not that they imagine a point to bee any positiue entity in it selfe; but because it is the first bound of magnitude, whence all terminated quan∣tities take their originall. The first princ le wee may call it, not of naturall constitution, because a thousand points colle∣cted, could not be so compounded, as out of it should arise the least magnitude; for (as the Philosopher hath taught vs) con∣tinuate and diuisible things cannot bee made out of such things as are meerely discontinuate and indiuisible, but because it is the first Mathematicall principle or beginning of termination and figuration. This point, although it haue euery-where an vse in Geometrie, yet no-where more remarkeable then when it becomes the center of a circle: which center wee ought not to imagine a meere Geometricall conceit, but such as findes ground in the Naturall constitution of the Terrestriall Spheare. For see∣ing all terrene bodies are carried in a right line as by a Radius to one point, from euery part of the circumference; we may ob∣serue a center as it were designed and pointed out by Nature it selfe in the Globe: Some haue here distinguished betwixt a point Physicall, and a point Mathematicall, as allotting the former Latitude, and sensible existence; but making the other meerely Indiuisible. But if the matter bee rightly vnderstood, they are not two points, but all one, distinguished only by a di∣uers name of conceit or consideration. For wee consider first a point as it is existent in a sensible particular body, and so we call it Physicall. Secondly wee abstract it from this or that body sen∣sible; but alwayes conceit it withall to bee in some body, and in this sort wee terme it Mathematicall : for the Mathematician abstracts not a Quantity or Quantitatiue signe from all subiects; for so being an accident, hee should conceiue it abstracted from its owne nature; but from this or that sensible body, as wood or stone. Such a point ought we to imagine the center of the Earth to be, not participating of any latitude or magnitude, albeit exi∣stent in some magnitude. I am not ignorant that some Writers haue taken a Physicall point for a small and insensible magni∣tude, in which sense the Globe of the Earth is called the center of all heauenly motions. But this sense is very improper; and besides in this example is to bee vnderstood a point Opticall, as such as carries no sensible or proportionable quantity in re∣gard of the sight. Taking then the center of the Earth to bee a point fixt in the middest of the Earthly Spheare, as we haue des∣cribed, wee will further describe the nature of it in two Theo∣remes. 1 The center of the Earth is not an Attractiue, but a meere Respectiue point. An Attractiue point I terme that, which hath in it a vertue or power to draw and attract the Terrestriall parts or bodies, in such sort as the Loadstone hath a power to draw iron or steele. But a Respectiue point is that, which the Bodies in their motions doe respect and conforme themselues vnto, as the bound or center to which their course is directed. Which may bee illustrated by the directiue operations of the Load-stone (which wee shall hereafter handle) by which the Magneticall Indix or needle pointeth directly Northward: not that in the North is fixed any Attractiue vertue or operation, whic might cause that effect; but because the Magneticall Instrument is directed towards such a point or center. That the Center of the earth hath no Attractiue force, may bee proued, 1 Because it cannot in any probability bee thought that an Imaginary point hauing only a priuatiue Being and subsistence, should challenge to it selfe any such operation. For all positiue effects, proceed out of positiue causes, neither can it be imagined that this At∣traction should grow out of a meere priuation. Secondly, should this be granted, that the motion of Earthly parts should be from the Attractiue vertue of the Center; it would follow necessa∣rily, that this motion should not bee Naturall, but violent : as proceeding from an externall cause, which all ancient and mo∣derne Philosophers deny. 2 The same point is the center of Magnitude and waight in the Terrestriall Spheare. That the same point in the Terrene Globe, should make the center both of Magnitude and Waight, may seeme very plaine: 1 Because we are not to multiply things and Entities in our con∣ceit, without any necessary consequence drawne from Nature or Reason; enforcing vs thereunto. But what reason could euer perswade any man, that the Earth had two Centers, the one of Waight, the other of Magnitude, but only a bare Imagination, without proofe or demonstration. Secondly, if this were gran∣ted, that the Center of magnitude were remoued some distance from the other; then consequently would one part of the Earth ouer-poize the other in ponderosity, and so the whole Spheare would either be shaken out of its place, or dissolue it selfe into its first principles. Both of which being by experience contra∣dicted, our assertion will stand sure and vndoubted. In the meane space, we deny not but that some little difference may be admitted in regard of the vnequall parts of the Earth; but this must needs be so small and insensible as cannot bee cacullated, or cause any alteration. 8 The Terrene parts conforming themselues to this center, may bee considered two wayes: either Absolutely, or Comparatiuely. Absolutely, as euery part is considered in it selfe. 9 A terrestriall part considered in it selfe, vn∣dergoes the respect either of a Point of Mag∣nitude ; as a point, when any signe or point in it selfe is considered in regard of his con∣formity to the center. A Point, albeit existing still in some magnitude (as we haue shewed) may notwithstanding bee abstracted from this or that body, as seruing for the center of any body, whose naturall in∣clination and conformity to the vniuersall center of the Earth, we may in the first place handle, as the Rule by which the mo∣tion and inclination of the whole magnitude ought to bee squared. 1 Euery point or center of waighty body, is moued toward the center of the Terrestriall Spheare by a right line. A Right line is the measure and rule almost of all Naturall actions: which albeit it be familiar in almost euery operation; yet most of all in the motion of the Earthly bodies tending to the center of the Earth. Why Nature in this kind should chiefly affect a Right line, sundry reasons may bee alleaged: 1 From the End which Nature doth propose it selfe, which is to pro∣duce the worke which shee intends, the readiest and shortest way; as Aristotle testifies of her in the 5 of his Metaphisickes. Now it is manifest that a Right line drawne betwixt the same points, is alwayes shortest, as Euclide shewes in his Elements ; where hee demonstrates that two sides of any triangle being counted together, are longer then the third. The better to vn∣derstand the working of Nature, wee shall obserue in the moti∣on of a heauy part to the center, a double scope or end; first, that the said part of a terrestriall body, should bee moued or se∣parated from the place to which it is by violence transposed. Secondly, that this body should bee restored home, and vnited to the Sphericall substance of the Earth, in which it must chiefly seeke its preseruation. That these two ends are best and soonest compassed by a right line is most manifest: For first a sepa∣paration from the place to which it is moued, is more quicke & expedient by a right line; forasmuch as crooked and circular lines, turne backe as it were into themselues againe. Also the v∣nion and coniunction of a part with the Spheare of the Earth, is most indebted to a right motion, because (as wee haue declared) the way is shorter. Secondly, it may bee alleaged, that Nature is an vniforme and necessary Agent, restrained to one only bound or end, and therefore can neither strengthen, weaken, remit or suspend the action, but workes alwayes by the same meanes, the same effects; whence it is that she chuseth a right line, being but one betwixt two points; whereas crooked lines may bee drawne infinite, and the motion directed by crooked lines would proue various and opposite to the prescript of Nature▪ Moreouer should wee imagine that nature at any time wrought by a crooked or circular line, it might be demanded, from what Agent this obliquity should arise? not from Nature it selfe: be∣cause (as wee said) shee worketh alwayes to the vtmost of her strength, hauing no power to remit or suspend her actio s. But a crooked motion ariseth from the remission or slacking of the Agents force, and turning it away from the intended end, which only findes place in Free and voluntary Agents. Neither comes this Deflexion from the medium, or Aire; because it can haue no such power to resist. Thirdly, if the motion were not performed in a right line, it could haue no opposite or contrary; because (as Aristotle teacheth) To a circular or crooked motion, de caelo cap. 4. no other motion can bee opposite or contrary in respect of the whole circle; but only in regard of the Diameter, which is alwayes a right line. By this it is plaine, that a waighty point considered in it selfe ab∣stractly, cannot but be carried to the center in a right line: which right line, really and Physically points out vnto vs a Radius or Beame drawne from the center to the circumference, to shew that the God of Nature in composing the earthly globe, both ob∣serued and taught vs the vse of Geometrie. 2 A point mouing toward the Center, will moue swifter in the end, then in the beginning. This hath been plainely obserued by experience, that a stone let fall from a towre or high place, will in motion grow swif∣ter and swifter, till it approach the ground or place whereon it falls. The reason may bee giuen from the Aire, which resist so much the lesse, by how much the body descendeth lower to∣ward the Earth or center; because when it is higher, the distance being greater, the parts of the Aire will make more Resistance. The reason rendred by Aristotle of this Resistance, is, because in the beginning of the motion, the stone or heauy body findes the Aire quiet and fixed : but being once set on motion, the higher parts of the Aire, successiuely moue those which are vnder, being driuen by the violence of the stone so falling, and prepare, as it were, the way for his comming. This reason may in some sort content an ingenious wit, till a better bee found out. 10 So much for the motion of a heauy point or center: it remaines that we treate next of the motions and conformity of Magnitudes to the center of the Earth: wherein we consider not only the Center or middle point, but the whole masse of the magnitude, whose motion and conformity shall bee expressed in this Theo∣reme; 1 The motion of a magnitude toward the center, is not meerely naturall, but mixt with a violent motion: This may easily bee demonstrated; because no point of any magnitude is moued to the Center naturally, but the middle point or center of the magnitude: For although the Center bee moued in a perpendicular line, which makes right angles with the Horizon; yet the extreme parts are moued in lines parallell, which cannot possibly make right angles with the Horizon, or meet in the Center; which may bee showne in this Fi∣gure. Let there bee a Circle as ABL. This done, wee will imagine a certaine magnitude hanging in the Aire, and ten∣ding to the Center C, which is signified by the line PEN. It is certaine that the Center of the mag∣nitude E, will moue and conforme it selfe downeward toward the center of the Earth by the line EC, which motion will bee naturall, as that which is deriued to a center from a circumfe∣rence by the direct Radius, which is the Rule of all naturall mo∣tions: But the other parts without the center of this magnitude, cannot moue but in so many lines, which shall bee parallell the one to the other: as for example, the point N must needs moue in the line NG, and the point P in the line PF, which being of equall distance, will neuer concurre in the Center, and therefore cannot bee esteemed naturall rayes of the circle; whence wee may collect, that the motion of these parts is not naturall, but violent : for if any should imagine the motion of these parts to be naturall, then should the point N moue to the center of the Earth by the line NC, and the point P. by the line PC; and so by how much the more any waighty body should approach the Center of the Earth, by so much it should bee diminished and curtailed in his quantity: so that in the Center it selfe, all the parts should concurre in an Indiuisible point, which is absurd & contradicts all reason. 11 Hitherto haue we spoken of the conformity of all Earthly and waighty bodies to the Ter∣rene center, as they are taken Absolutely. It now remaines that we speake of these bodies as they are taken comparatiuely, being compared one with the other. This discourse properly belongs to an art which is called Sta∣ticke and Mathematicall ; whose office is to demonstrate the af∣fections of Heauinesse and Lightnesse of all Bodies out of their causes. The chiefe sensible Instrument whereon these proper∣ties are demonstrated and shewne, is the Bilanz or Ballance. But these specialties wee leaue to such as haue purposely writ∣ten of this subiect: amongst which the most ancient and chiefe is Archimedes, whose heauenly wit ouertooke all such as went before him, and out-went all such as followed. Enough it will seeme in this Treatise to insert a proposition or two Staticall, to shew the Conformity of two magnitudes, and their proper Center, mouing downeward toward the Globe of the Earth, and it's Center. 1 The lines wherein the centers of two heauy bo∣dies are moued downeward, being continued, will meet in the Center of the Earth. A heauy point or Center (as wee haue demonstrated hereto∣fore in this Chapter) is moued toward the Center of the world in a right line, which is imagined to bee a Ray of the whole Spheare deriued from the circumference to the Center, & ther∣fore it is impossible they should bee parallell or Equidistant, but concurrent lines. But because the whole distance betwixt vs and the Center is very great; it must needs happen that in a small space the concurse of perpendicular lines is altogether insensible. For if two perpendicular or heauy points moued in a line, should be distant one from the other the space of 10, a 100 or more feet; because this distance is very little in respect of the semidiameter of the Earth: the angle of concurse must needs be very little, and by consequence those two rayes or lines, measu∣ring the descent of two heauy Bodies, will seeme altogether Equidistant. Yet that there is such a concurrence, Nature and Reason will easily consent. Hence wee may detect a popular er∣rour beleeued of the vulgar, that the walls of houses standing vpright are parallell and of equall distance; when contrariwise it is plaine that such walls are erected by a perpendicular, and measured by perpendicular lines, which being drawne out in length will meet in the Center of the Earth. The like may we pronounce of a deep Well, whose sides or wall are erected per∣pendicularly; and therefore should it reach as farre as the Cen∣ter, it must needs follow that the sides growing neerer and nee∣rer as they approach the Center, would in the end close or shut vp into a Pyramide, whose Base should bee the mouth of the Well. Likewise if a Tower should bee erected to the Heauens, it would be strange to imagine, how great and broad the vpper part of it would bee in respect of the bottome. Hence againe it may be inferred, that any p uement leuelled by a perpendicular is not an absolute plain, but rather the portion or Arch of a sphe∣ricall superficies, whose Center is the same with the Center of the whole E rth. But this roundnesse in a small distance is no way sensible: but in a great pauement of foure or fiue hundred paces leuelled perpendicularly; it will make some shew of roundnesse: whence it must needs follow, that an extraordinary great pauement measured ouer by a right line, cannot be called leuell or equally poized, forasmuch as it is not euery where e∣qually distant from the Center of the Earthly Globe. 2 Two heauy bodies of the same figure and matter whether Equall or Vnequall, will in equall time moue an equall space. This proposition being inuented by one Iohannes Baptist de Benedictis, is cited and confirmed by Iohn Dee, in his Mathema∣ticall Preface to Billing slie's Geometry ; Which corrects a com∣mon errour of those men, which suppose the lighter bodies ge∣nerally not to moue so fast downeward to the Center as the hea∣uy. The demonstration of this Theoreme, being drawne from many Staticall principles, which we cannot here conueniently insert, wee are enforced to omit: as intending not the search of these matters any farther than they direct vnto the knowledge of Geographie. Yet were it no hard matter to giue more po∣pular expression of this reason out of the proportion betwixt this weight of the heauy Body, and the Resistance of the Medi∣um. Because the Greater Body, as it is carryed down-ward by a greater force and violence; so on the other side it meets a grea∣ter impediment, being not able so soone to diuide the Aire, as the Lesser: Likewise the Lesser body falling with lesse force, yet is more apt to diuide it then the other. Whence both set the one against the other, there will be no disparity in the time and motion. 12 Of the primary conformity of the Terrestri∣all bodyes in the constitution of the Terrestri∣all Spheare, wee haue treated: It now seemes needfull that we descend to the secondary, which is the inclination of all the parts, to make a round Spheare or Globe. 1 The Terrestriall Globe is round and Sphericall. This Proposition is of great vse, and one of the chief grounds in Geographie. The ground of the Sphericall figure of the Earth, is the right motion of heauy bodies to the center. For this right motion (as wee haue shewed) doth expresse one Beame of the circle, by whose circumuolution is pro uced the circumference of i , which we call Secundary conformity of the parts of the Earth; in so much as it growes Mathematically (as it were) out of the first. For this Sphericall figure of the Earth, sundry sound reasons are vrged by Geographers : First, that the Earth is round according to its Latitude, that is, from North to South▪ Secondly, according to its Longitude, that is, from East to West, and therefore must it needes bee abso utely Sphericall▪ The first part is shewed, that it is round from N rth to South; for if a man trauell from North to South, or contra∣riwise from South to North, hee shall perceiue n w starres in the Heauens to appeare and shew themselues, which before h e could not see: which can be referred to no other cause then the Sphericall conuexity, or swelling of the Earth. As for example▪ The starre which is called Canopus, which is a notable starre in the ship; appeares not at Rhodes, or at least from high places. But if you trauell forth Southward from Italy into Egypt, to Alexandria, the same starre ( Proclus obserues) will manifest it selfe to your sight the fourth part of a signe aboue the Horizon. L. de Sphaer. From whence wee may draw a sound proofe, that there is a Sphericall and gibbous conuexitie, which interposeth it selfe betwixt Rhodes and Egypt. In which place, the people who inhabite that part of Egypt, which borders vpon Arabia, which are called Troglo ites, of their dwelling in caues, cannot see any Starre of the Great Beare. Whence wee may conclu e, that the Earth from the North to the South, is round and Sphericall. For if otherwise the Earth were plaine, all the Northerne starres would appeare to the inhabitants of the Southerne Regions; and on the other side, all the other Southerne constellations would bee seene of the Northerne inhabitants, which sense and reason altogether contradict. Secondly, that the Earth is round accor∣ding to its Longitude betwixt East and West, may bee proued by two reasons. The first is taken from the rising and setting of the Sunne, Moone, and other Starres, for as much as all they doe not arise or set with all Nations at the same houres. For with the inhabitants of the East, the Sun-rising is sooner; with the Westerne inhabitants later; and that in such proportion, that euery 15 degrees measured out by the Sunnes diurnall moti∣on, adds or subtracts one whole houre in the length of the day. This is found by experience and testimony of Cosmographers, that the Sunne riseth with the Persian, inhabiting toward the East, foure houres sooner then to the Spaniard in the West. Sundry other the like examples may bee alleaged; all which we must needes impute to the Sphericall roundnesse of the Earth, proportionally increasing betwixt East and West. The other reason to confirme this last point, is drawne from the Ecclipses of the Sunne and Moone, which would not appeare in diuers places, at diuers houres, if the Earth were plaine or square. We see plainly that Ecclipses of the Moone appeare sooner to the Westerne people, but later to the Easterne. As (according to Ptolomie ) in Arbela a towne of Assyria (where Alexander ouer∣came Darius the last King of the Persians ) was there obser∣ued an Ecclipse at the fifth houre of the night, Lib. 1 geog. cap. 4. which selfe∣same Ecclipse was seene in Carthage at the second: which to a∣ny man appeares plainly in this figure here inserted. In like man∣ner an Ecclipse of the Sunne at Campania which was obserued betwixt 8 and 9. was (as Pliny reports) seene in Armenia be∣twixt 10 and 11 of the clocke. Lib. 2. c. 72. Whence may be gathered that this difference of ap∣pearance arose from the roundnesse of the Earth, interposing it selfe betwixt these two places. Another reason to proue the Spericall figure of the Earth, is drawne from the Ecclipse of the Moone, wherein the obscured point is described by a Sphericall figure, which must needs argue, that the body which causeth the shadow, is also round. For as the Optickes teach vs, the shadow is wont to follow and imitate the opacous body whence it proceedes, and all men confesse that the Ecclipse of the Moone is made by the interposition of the Spheare of the Earth betwixt the Sun & Moone, intercepting the beames of the Sun, which should illu∣strate & lighten the Moone. The third reason may be taken from the absurdities which would follow, should we admit any other figure besides. For granting it to be plaine (as some of the Plato∣nists haue imagined) it would necessarily follow in reason; 1 That the Eleuation of the Pole would bee the same in all the parts of the Earth. 2 That there Would bee the same face and appearance of the Heauens in all places. 3 That the Sunne and Moone, with other starres, would in all places arise alike at the same houres. 4 That all Ecclipses would appeare to all places at the same houres. 5 That the same quantity of dayes & nights would bee at all places. 6 That the shadowes would bee euery where alike; and one Region would not bee hotter or colder then another; all which would plainly stand opposite to reason and experience. As many or more would proue the absurdities of those, that ascribe to the Earth any other figure then Sphe∣ricall. Which I willingly passe ouer, as not willing to fight with shadowes, and faigne an opposition, where I scarce finde an ad∣uersary. These reasons are sufficient to proue, that the whole masse of the Earth is Sphericall. Diuers other popular argu∣ments may be drawne from the finall cause to countenance this Assertion. For no other figure can bee assigned to the Earth, which can more vphold the order of Nature, or speake the wis∣dome of the Omnipotent Creator. 1 Because such a Figure would best beseeme the Earth, the seate and dwelling-place of all liuing Creatures, which is most capable: because otherwise the God of Nature would seeme to doe something in vaine, and without cause: Forasmuch as the same capacity might bee con∣fined within stricter bounds. Now it is apparant to all Mathe∣maticians, that amongst all those figures which they call Isope∣r etrall, a Circle is the most capable, and amongst the rest, those which appro ch neerest vnto a circle. And as wee esteeme of a circle described in a plaine surf ce, so must we iudge in solides of a Spheare. Which profitable Geometry of Nature wee shall finde instilled into most liuing Creatures, who by a certaine Na∣turall Instinct, without the vse of Reason, make their Nests and resting-places of a Sphericall Figure, as most conuenient, and of greatest capacity; as experience shewes vs, in the Nests of Birds, and Bee-Hiues, wherein the cells are fashioned round & Sphe∣ricall. 2 We shall find the holy Scriptures consonant to this o∣pinion in diuers places; but that it might seeme impiety to vse those sacred helpes in a matter out of controuersie, and needing no such Demonstration. 2 The rugged and vnequall parts of the Earth, hinder not the Sphericall roundnesse of it. It is thought by ignorant people, that the Earth is not round, because of the rugged and vneuen parts of the superfi∣cies of it: For some-where it swells with great and high moun∣taines, rocks, and hills; Other-where it seemes indented, and (as it were) trenched into valleyes, & concauities; all which seeme to detract from a true Sphericall superficies ; because in such a one, euery line drawne from the Center to it, should bee equall one to the other. Indeed that the Globe of the Earth is not Abso∣lutely and Geometrically round, as an Artificiall Spheare, is con∣fessed by Eratosthenes, cited by Strabo in his 1 booke of Geogra∣phie ▪ whence Pliny in his booke, cap. 21. saith, Lib. 1. that the Earth & Water make one Globe, not so absolutely round as the Hea∣uens, but much different, also Strabo confirmes. This propo∣sition depending on these 3 reasons which follow, will shew that this Inequality, how great soeuer it seeme to the sight, is altogether insensible, and bearing no proportion with the huge vastnesse of the whole Earth. The first is taken from the per∣pendicular hight of the greatest and highest mountaine, which is seldome or neuer found to exceed 10 miles, (although few Mathematicians will grant so much) whereas the whole Dia∣meter of the Earth containes no lesse th n 7200 English miles ; so that these hils compared to the thicknes of the Earth are but s 10 to 7200: which indeed hath no sensible proportion. The se∣cond is taken from the Ecclipse of the Moone, which being caused by the shadow of the interposed Earth, is described by a Sphericall figure, without any vnequall or rugged parts, which no doubt, would appeare, if these parts challenge any due proportion▪ or sensible quantity, in respect of the whole Earth. Thirdly, some haue illustrated this by a round bowle, or ball, whose externall surface, although vnequall, and indented here & there with scotches, other-where swelling with knobs, will notwithstanding being interposed betwixt the Sun-beame and a wall, or such place, giue a round or Sphericall shadow in the same wall or plaine, in regard of the little quantity of these small parts in respect of the whole Body. In like sort must wee imagine the mountaines and vnequall parts in the face of the Earth, to bee no otherwise then as so many warts or pimples in the face of man, which cannot alter his du proportion or sym∣metry of the parts. 3 The Water concurring with the Earth in the Globe is also Sphericall. It is a proposition agreed on by Archimedes, and almost all the ancient Mathematicians of any note, that the superficies of the Water, or any other liquor, standing and subsisting quietly of it se fe, is Sphericall ; whose center will bee the same with the center of the whole Earth, which we are here to handle, be∣cause it appertaines to the making vp of the Terrestriall Globe ; although wee shall haue occasion hereafter to speake specially concerning the Water in Hydrographie, in the second part of this Treatise. The reasons to confirme this assertion, beside those that in generall proue the Sphericity of the Terrene globe are diuers: 1 It is obserue that Passengers in a Ship, lanching out into the deepe from some Hauen, will first perceiue the Towers, Buildings, Castles, Promontories, and Trees standing on the land, in their perfect figure and greatnesse: sayling far∣ther off, they will obserue them on the lower part, little & little diminished, vntill such time as the tops only of the houses and trees will bee visible. In like sort they which tarry on the Land, will first espye the top and mas of a Ship approaching, which sight will bee perfected more and more, as the Ship drawes to∣ward the land, and at last all parts of it will shew themselues; which accident can bee cast vpon no other cause, then the Sphe∣ricall roundnesse, and swelling of the water; which, if the di∣stance be great, interposeth it selfe betweene the station on the Land and the Ship where∣in Passengers are conueyed, which experiment is expressed in this Diagramme here anne∣xed. Certaine Platonicks, of which the chiefest is Patricius a late Writer, would ascribe this experiment to the impediment of the sight, caused partly by the distance wich cannot perfectly represent the ob∣iect, partly by the interposed vapours arising in the Sea; part∣ly by the quiuering light which is spread by the refraction of the Sun-beames in the water. I deny not but these causes may somewhat hinder, and cause that the true and perfect species of a body cannot alwayes visit the sight. Yet will it bee euident that this is not all, but that the Sphericall roundnesse of the wa∣ter will proue a greater impediment where the distance is any thing greater. But for one of Patricius his shifts concerning va∣pour arising out of the Sea, (to which Clauius seemes also to consent in his Commentary vpon Iohannes de Sacrobosco ) it makes more for our assertion then his. For that which is seene in a thicke medium, according to the doctrine of the Opticks, seemes greater in quantity, and by consequence neerer, and so higher then would otherwise appeare: as wee see by experience, that the Sunne sometimes is seene of vs before it ascend aboue the Horizon, because of a refraction of it's beames in a thicke matter. Wherefore it were rather to be imagined, that a tower seene at Sea, or a ship from the land, through these thicke and grosse va∣pours, should appeare higher, and seeme neerer then if it met not with such vapours. Secondly, what is vrged concerning the trembling light, caused by a refraction of the Sun-beames in the water, is of no force: For although such a light might cause an impediment or hinderance to the sight; yet would not this decrement or hinderance bee by degrees and in such pro∣portion as we find it to be correspondent, to wit, to the distance interposed. And much wonder it is that Patricius (as my learned Friend M r R. Hues obserues) being, as it seemes very well read in the stories of Spanish nauigations, should not bee conuinced out of the Navigation of Magellane, who taking his iourney toward the Southwest parts, passed by the Magel∣lane straights, now called by his name, and so returned by the Cape of Good Hope into Spaine, to which wee way adde the voi∣ages of Drake, Candish, and many others. The second reason is vrged by Aristotle in his 2 d booke de coelo, and hath its ground in Archimedes lib. 1. de Aqua-vectis, which is formed in this sort. The nature of the water is to affect and flow to the lower place, whence it must necessarily bee inferred that it must bee round, for otherwise it should not alwayes obtaine the lower place. The reason of the consequence shall bee expressed in this figure; for if we ascribe to the wa∣ter a plaine superficies, let it for example bee ADB, and from the center of the earth C let there be described a circle, to wit, EGF, then let there be drawne CD, a perpendicular line to AB, and let AC and BC be ioyned together. Now because the right line CD is lesse then CA, or CB, as will appeare euidently by sense; it will be plaine that the point D will be in a lower place then the point A or B, because D is neerer to the Center; for as much as DC is but a part of a beame of the circle whereas AC and CB euidently exceed that quan∣tity or proportion. Another reason there is, commonly drawne from the roundnes of drops cast on the sand, as also from water in pots, whose superficies seemes to swell aboue the brimmes; but this reason, as we shall proue in place conuenient, is rather against this assertion then for it; because indeed, wee affirme the water to be round▪ but so as it claimes the same Center with the Center of the Terrene Globe; and therefore cannot be sensible in so little a portion, as a drop, or pot of water. This proposition being sufficiently proued by these two reasons; it is needfull in the second place that wee answer certaine obiections cast in by the said Patricius against our assertion. Euery surface of the water (quoth Patricius ) is either only plaine, or only round, or both plaine and round, or neither plaine nor round: First that it is not both plaine and round, seemes very euident, for so it should admit of contrariety : Neither can one part be plaine and another round, because the water is an vniforme and homo∣geneall body, not consisting of such vnequall parts: that it should neither bee plaine nor round seemes more impossible, be∣cause f w or none haue dreamt of any other figure. Lastly, that it is not round only, hee labours to confirme by sundry rea∣sons and experiments. First, he testifies of himselfe, that sayling in the Sea, he plainely aw in the morning before Sun-rising, the Mountaines of Corsica ; which afterward, assoone as the Sunne was risen, vanished out of his sight. Whence he concludes, that this proceeds not from the roundnesse of the Earth, but from some other cause. But this argumēt to iudicious men will seeme very weake, 1 Because it depends altogether on the authority and credit of Patricius, whose assertion I take to bee no better then another mans deniall. 2 ly were this argument euery where sound, yet would it proue no other thing, but that this effect were not to be imputed to the Sphericall swelling of the Earth. Whence cannot bee drawne any generall conclusion, that the Earth or Water is not Sphericall. Wee deny not in the meane time▪ that other causes sometimes concurre, which may hinder or take away the sight of obiects from those who saile on the Sea. The second experiment, Patricius describes in this manner. At a certaine Towne called Coma lum (saith hee) there is a ve∣ry great poole; through which poole or lake some 3 yeares a∣goe, it was my chance to bee carried in a boat. The bottome of the water almost all the way in all the iourney appeared to bee lesse then 2 foot in depth from the top. The way increasing, at first the lower parts and foundations of houses, then the tops and princely pinnacles began to vanish from our sight: at last hauing scarce passed 6000 paces, a Tower 72 foot high began to appeare, as it were cut off by the middle, and from the middle part vpward appeared visible; but after 10000 paces it was taken out of sight: I would here aske the Geographers (quoth Patricius ) whether in so short a distance, wherein the bottome for the whole space surpassed not two foot in depth, the water could ascend to 72 foot? Had it beene my chance to haue gone with Patricius ouer the lake, I might perhaps by obseruation of this experiment, haue giuen a more probable coniecture of the cause. Neuerthelesse being vnacquainted aswell with the place, as the truth of his obseruation, I may perhaps guesse somewhat at his errour. First then, whereas hee auerres, that passing along for the space of a 1000 paces, a Tower of 72 foot high, seemed cut off by the midst, which at 10000 vanished out of sight. I confesse that in so short a space the swelling of the water inter-posed, could not be so great as to hinder the sight, and bee the cause of this effect: wherefore some other Acciden∣tall cause must bee sought out. For the finding out of which to come as neere as I can, I would make inquiry, whether this passage of the Boat was directly forward from the Tower on the Water, no land inter-posed: or Indirectly side-wise, in such sort, as the shoare might be placed betwixt their sight and the Tower mentioned: The former no wayes can be imagined; for∣as much as it not only contradicts the grounds of our receiued Philosophie ; but also of Patricius himselfe: for giuing the Earth a plaine surface, or Angular, or any other forme, it were impos∣sible that in so short a distance, such an effect should happen out of the figurature of the water. If the passage were oblique or in∣direct, in such wise as the shoare might any way inter-pose it selfe betwixt the Boat and the Tower, it were easie to imagine how such an experiment should happen: for the land by which the Boat might bee carried, might haue an ascent by such De∣grees, as the Tower at 1000 paces might bee for the halfe of it obscured, and at last bee altogether taken out of sight. This rea∣son then of Patricius, seemes rather to bee ascribed to the Land then the Water. The third reason of Patricius is drawne from the Homogeneity of the Water. If the water (saith hee) haue a round superficies, the parts of it would challenge the like figure, because in homogeneall bodies, the same reason is to bee giuen of the whole, and of the parts : But the parts of the water are not Sphericall, as may bee proued by diuers instances: 1 Because water in the mouth of a pot, seemes not to haue any such Sphe∣ricall roundnesse: for although at the brinke it seeme to bee re∣strained aboue the pot, yet no such swelling appeares in the middle. 2 ly That riuers are kept in by their bankes, which o∣therwise would flow abroad. 3 ly That riuers, when by the mel∣ting of snow, they swell so great, as they can hardly bee contay∣ned within their bankes, doe not seeme higher in the middle, then in other places. 4 ly If any man from one side of the riuer to the other, leuels at any marke, he may surely hit it: which hee should not doe, if there were any Sphericall swelling in the midst, which might hinder the sight. 5 ly and lastly it seemes so vnlikely, that the water should rise in the midst, that it is more probable it should be more hollow; in that we plainly obserue that all filth and rubbish carried from the bankes into the riuer, is wont to settle and swimme in the midst. Notwithstanding all these argumēts of Patricius, our ground is yet vnshaken; 1 Con∣cerning small drops, and water in the mouth of pots; it is found to be round and Sphericall, though not exactly: the reason wher∣of wee shall declare hereafter. This roundnesse, I confesse, serues not any way to the confirmation of this assertion, because the Sphericity and roundnes which wee auerre to be in Water, hath for its center, the center of the whole Earth: and therefore in so small an arch or section, as the bredth of a pot, or a drop of water, cannot possibly haue any sensible appearance or existence. And we must needs confesse, that this experiment was very fondly vrged to this purpose by some of our Geographers, and such as stands not with any demonstration. Which granted, sufficiently answers all the reasons last vrged by Patricius, except the last. For as much as he requires in the Water, a sensible appearance of this roundnesse in euery riuer or little parcell of water, which cannot bee admitted. Touching the last thing which hee vrgeth, that all the rubbish and filthy matter, is from the bankes carryed into the middle, whence he would inferre▪ the middle to be hol∣low and lowest; we can answer diuers wayes: 1 That this ex∣periment is not alwayes certaine, because euery man may often∣times see the contrary; to wit, that such filthy rubbish rather vseth to cleaue to the banks of the riuer, then to float into the midst. 2 ly That if any such thing happen, it is because of the tor∣rents which run violently from the banks into the midst, carry∣ing with it such things as are light, the steepnesse of the place being greater, the current wider or swifter. But nothing here can bee concluded to proue the water according to his naturall force, to be either plaine or hollow in the midst, which this Ad∣uersary vndertooke to demonstrate. CHAP. III. Of the Partiall magneticall affections in the Spheare of the Earth. 1 HItherto haue we discoursed of such affe∣ctions of the Terrestriall Spheare as are Elementary, and knowne heretofore to ancient Philosophers: It followes in the next place that we treat of Magneticall affections, to wit, such as follow the magneticall nature of the Earth. Of the vertue and propriety of the Load-stone ▪ many haue written, but few sought out the true nature. The inuention of it is attributed to a certaine heards-man, who hauing his shooes shod with iron▪ and an iron-pike in his hand, resting himselfe on a quarry of Load-stone, could hardly remoue himselfe frō thence. But this seemes rather a pleasant Poeticall inuention, then a true History, hauing no good Author to auouch it. But to let passe the first Inuention, being a matter rather indebted to chance then industrie ; no small difficulties haue discouered themselues in the inuention and finding out of the causes of Magneticall properties. Somewhat, I cōfesse, hath been written of such mag∣neticall affections as haue been most knowne; such as is the ver∣tue Attractiue, by which it drawes to it selfe iron, or steele; as also the vertue Directiue, by which a needle touched with the Magnet, directs and conformes it selfe North and South. The rest of Magneticall proprieties I find in ancient Writers, as little knowne as their causes; & if any matter herein were broached, it was merely coniecturall, and depending on no certain demō∣stration: neither had we any certaine or satisfactory knowledge of this thing, vntill such time as it pleased God to raise vp one of our Countrymen D. Gilbert, who to his euerlasting praise hath troden out a new path to Philosophy, and on the Loadstone ere∣cted a large Trophie to commend him to posterity. This famous Doctor being as pregnan in witty apprehension, as diligent in curious search of naturall causes: after many experiments, and long inqui y, found the causes of most magneticall motions and proprieties hid in the magneticall temper and constitution of the Earth, and that the Earth it selfe was a meere Magneticall body challenging all those proprieties, and more then haue expressed themselues in the Load-stone. Which opinion of his was no soo∣ner broached, then it was embraced and well-commed by ma∣ny prime wits, aswell English as Forraine. In so much that i hath of late taken large root, and gotten much ground of our vulgar Philosophie : Not that in the maine scope and drift of it▪ it contradicts or crosses all Peripateticall principles, or the most part of such grounds as haue hitherto borne the stampe aswell of Antiquity, as of Authority : But that it hath brought to light matters of no small moment, which neuer found any ground or footsteps in our ordinary Philosophie. This new Philosophie I dare not commend as euery-where perfect and absolute, being but of late yeeres inuented, and not yet brought to mature per∣fection: yet would it sauour of little ingenuity or iudgement in any man, peruersely to deny all such Magneticall affections in the Earth as are grounded on plaine experiments and obseruati∣on, sith no Philosophie was euery way so exact, but required experience dayly to correct it. I intend not here an absolute dis∣course of Magneticall Bobies and Motions, but leaue it to their search whose experimentall industrie is more suteable to such a subiect. Onely I will shew some generall grounds appertaining to the constitution of the Terrestriall Globe, which I hold ne∣cessary for a Geographer. Wherefore ere I curiously distinguish these Magneticall proprieties of the Earth into other seuerall kindes, I will set downe this Theoreme, as a ground or founda∣tion of that which followes. 1 The Terrestriall Spheare is of a Magneticall nature and disposition. A Magneticall Body by some is defined to bee that which seated in the Aire, doth place it selfe in one place naturall, not alterable. This situation is supposed to agree to all the Starres▪ especially to the great Globes of Saturne, Iupiter, Mars, and the Sunne ; as also to such as giue their attendance on them, late∣ly detected by the Trunk-spectacle; to wit, those two Starres which moue about Saturne, the foure which moue about Iupi∣ter, the two which circle about the Sunne, as Venus and Mer∣curie ; and lastly the Moone, which encompasseth the Spheare of the Earth. But to let passe those other Globes, as farther off, and therefore lesse subiect to our search: our discourse shall only touch the Earth whereon wee liue, which wee shall proue to partake of a certaine Magneticall vertue or inclination: which to shew more openly, we must vnderstand, that all Magneticall Globes haue some parts of their bodies which bee also Magne∣ticall, which being diuorced from their proper Spheare, & mee∣ting no obstacle, will settle themselues to the naturall situation of their peculiar Orbes. Which wee may plainly perceiue in the Spheare of the Earth, wherein wee shall find two Magneticall minerals; whereof the one is the Load-stone, attracting iron or steele; the other the Iron or steele it selfe: either ofthese two▪ artificially hanged in the Aire, or placed in a little boat on the water, all incombrances being remoued, will conforme & settle their parts and Poles correspondent to the poles and parts of the Terrestriall Spheare, as North and South. This hath been found in all parts of the Earth by such as haue trauelled round about her, as Drake and Candish, whose Compasses were alwayes di∣rected Magnetically in all places which they passed: which we cannot ascribe to any other cause then the disponent faculty of the Earth's Magneticall Spheare, as shall appeare hereafter by demonstration. Moreouer it hath been obserued by such as saile Northerly and Southerly, that the Magneticall Inclinatory nee∣dle, in euery eleuation of the Pole is conformed and disposed to the Axell of the Earth, according to certaine angles answerable to the latitude of the Region, as wee shall shew hereafter. This diuersity of conformity must necessarily arise, either from the Magneticall instrument in it selfe absolutely considered, or els from the Harmony and correspondency it hath with the Ter∣rene Globe. It cannot be the first; because it should bee the same in all places and Regions of the Earth, which is contrary to ex∣perience, and our supposition. Then must wee needes deriue it from the Magneticall disponent vertue of the whole Globe of the Earth, from which vertue the whole Earth may bee called Magneticall. Nay if we truely consider, these Magneticall affe∣ctions primarily agree to the Earth, as the mother of all Magne∣ticall bodies; but afterward secondarily are deriued into the parts; because (as Gilbert relates it) the cause of magneti∣call motions and affections is the magneticall forme of a Spheri∣call Globe; which forme first agrees to the whole Globe of the Earth, and so is deriued to all his homogeneall parts. These parts are called Homogeneall, not in regard of their Matter and quan∣tity, but in respect of their Magneticall nature, and communion, which in euery part is conspicuous. If any man should wonder why the Earth should bee called Magneticall in regard of this minerall, which seemes one of the least and scarcest substances whereof it consisteth; we may many wayes answer, First, that although the surface of the Earth seemes for the most part com∣posed of other materials, more conuenient for the vse of liuing Creatures which dwell therein: yet may infinite rocky mines of Magnets be couched lower toward the center, which streng∣then and consolidate the Earthly Globe▪ Secondly, wee must not imagine the Magneticall substance of the Earth, to bee all one kinde of stone, but various: for somewhere it is hard & so∣lide as the true magnet it selfe and the iron which is nothing els but a mettall decocted out of the Load-stone; (for iron O e differs little or nothing at all from the Load-stone it selfe) some∣where againe, this substance is more thinne and fuid, being lesse concocted as some kinde of clay, and certaine vapours ari∣sing out of the Earth, which bee magneticall: which being brought to a harder and more massie substance, will haue the same affections and motions with the Loadstone it selfe. This assertion of the Earth's magneticall nature, wee shall confirme more euidently hereafter, where we shall proue both the Poles, the Meridian, Parallels, and other circles, to bee not bare Ima∣ginary lines, as some haue thought (but to bee Really grounded in the magneticall nature of the Earth, and are to be shewed in any round Loadstone, wrought and placed conueniently with instruments thereunto applied. 2 The Magneticall affection of the Earth is twofold, either Radicall or Deriued The Ra∣dicall disposition we call that which is the first root and ground of all other magneticall mo∣tions. 3 The Radicall vertue or inclination is a∣gaine twofold, either Motiue or Disponent. The Motiue is that by which all magneticall bodies are inclined and stirred vp to the mo∣tion. In the Reasonable soule of a man, wee haue two faculties which shew themselues; a motiue, and a directiue or disponent power: whereof the one stirres vp the motion, the other regu∣lates, conformes, and directs it: The former is the Will, the later the Discourse and Iudgement. This distinction of faculties, how∣soeuer more euident in the soule, findes place in all Naturall a∣gents: in which a Philosopher ought to distinguish betwixt that which giues them a power to moue, and that which limits, determines, and (as the Schoolemen are wont to speake) mo∣dificates the action. Amongst others the magnet-stone seemes most to partake of these two powers, as that which amongst all naturall agents (in Gilberts opinion) seemes most to haue resemblance with the soule of a man: so that by an apt Trope it hath been called of many, the Magneticall soule of the Earth; for hence wee may well perceiue one vertue or inclination, which useth the magneticall needle to moue out of its place; ano∣ther by which it is apt to conforme it selfe North and South, as also to obserue certaine angles correspondent to the latitude of the place, as shall bee demonstrated in due place. Of the mo∣tiue power we will produce these Theoremes. 1 The Magneticall motion is excited in a small & vnperceiuable difference of time. This proposition may be shewed out of euident experiment, wherein euery mans sight may be a witnes. For if an Iron-needle touched with the Loadstone, be placed within the Spheare of the magneticall vertue of the stone, it will presently moue it selfe, notwithstanding the interposition of solide bodies, which made Gilbert to imagine this motion to bee effected by a meere spirituall and immateriall effluxe, which may well be compared to the light, which neuerthelesse it surpasseth in subtility: for the light is moued from East to West so quickly, that many haue thought this motion to haue been in a moment or instant of time. But this quicknes of motion may much more be imagi∣ned in the Magneticall vertue, being of a more subtile and pier∣cing nature, as may bee gathered from this reason, to wit; That the light is alwayes hindered by the interposition of a thicke and opacous body; but the vertue Magneticall findes a passage through all solide bodies whatsoeuer; and meets with no im∣pediment. 2 This Motiue quality is Spherically spread through euery part of the Magneticall body. Here againe may wee finde a great resemblance betwixt the magneticall vertue and the light ; for as all light Bodies, as the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, cast their beames euery way into an orbicular forme: so this Magneticall vigour casts it selfe a∣broad not only from the center toward the superficies, but from the superficies outward into the Aire or Water, where this mag∣neticall body is placed, and so makes vp a Spheare; but yet with this difference, that if the body bee meere and perfectly Sphericall, the Orbe of the magneticall vertue will end in a perfect Spheare, as wee see the magnet G to confine his vertue within the Circle BF. But if it be a square, or any other fi∣gure not Sphericall, it imitates a Spheare as neere as the body will suffer, in that it spreades it selfe euery-where from the cen∣ter by right lines; yet will it be confined in a square figure cor∣respondent to the body, whence it proceeds, as we see the vertue of the square magnet A, to cast his beames into the square figure LD. 3 The motiue quality of the Magneticall body is strongest of all in the Poles, in other parts by so much the stronger by how much these parts are situated neere the Poles. Wee suppose out of the principles of Magneticall Philoso∣phie, that a Magnet hath two Poles, whose vse wee shall shew hereafter. These Poles are found by experiment to haue more force and vigour in them then other parts, and all other parts to enioy more or lesse force, by how much neerer or farther off they are situated to their Poles. The reason is ascribed by these Writers to the disposition of the Magneticall vigour in the bo∣dy of the Load stone, as shall appeare by this figure following in Gilbert, expressing the great Magneticall Body of the earth. Let the Sphericall superficies of it bee HQE, the Pole E, the Center M: HQ the plaine of the Equinoctiall; from euery point of this Equinoctiall plaine, the vigour Magneticall is conueyed and extended to CFNE; and to euery point from C to E the Pole: but not towards the point B, so neither from G toward C. The vi∣gour is not strengthned in the part FHG, from that which is GMFE; but FGH doth in∣crease the vertue in H: so that there can arise no vigor so far from the pa∣rallels to the Axel—tree aboue the said parallels, but internally from the parallels to the Pole. So wee see that from euery point of the Equinoctiall plaine, the force is deriued to the Pole E. But the point F hath only the vigour from GH, and the point N from OH: but the Pole E is corroborated and strengthened from the whole plaine of the Equinoctiall HQ. Wherefore the vigour magneticall in this Pole is most eminent and remarkable, but in the middle spa∣ces; as for example in F, the magneticall quality is so far streng∣thened, as the portion of the Equinoctiall plaine H, can giue. But D r Ridley in his late Magneticall Treatise, in the 6. Chapt. seemes to oppose this Demonstration. For although hee ac∣knowledgeth that the vigour is strongest of all in the Poles; yet (saith hee) if tryall bee made what the Pole will take per∣pendicularly; and also what the parts aboue 34 degrees will lift vp, it will appeare to bee halfe asmuch perpendicularly; so that the Pole doth not take vp as much, as this and the other part doth on the other side. But the decision of these differences I leaue to such as are more experimentall then my selfe, being destitute of those helpes and instruments which they enioy. 4 It behoues vs in the second place to speake of the Disponent vigour of Magneticall bo∣dies▪ The Disponent force we call, that facul∣tie by which magneticall Bodies are dis∣posed or directed to a certaine site or position. 1 Magneticall bodies moue not vncertainly, but haue their motions directed and conformed to cer∣taine bounds. This Proposition is confirmed by manifold experiments. For magneticall bodies are neuer found to moue vncertainly, and at all adventures, but conforme themselues to certaine Poles; and make certaine angles proportionall to the latitude, as we shall shew hereafter in particular. The reason of which experiment wee can draw from no other cause, then the first institution of Nature in all Naturall agents, which wee would haue directed to certaine ends, that nothing in her Common-wealth might seeme idle or vnnecessary; wherefore shee giues all agents not only a power to worke their ends; but also shewes them the way, squares and regulates the meanes which direct vnto the end. No-where is this directiue power more remarkable, then in magneticall bodies, especially in their Direction and Varia∣tion, motions treated of hereafter in place conuenient; to which for a further confirmation of the Theoreme, wee referre the Reader. 9 The Radicall facultie of the magneticall bo∣dy being somewhat spoken of, aswell in their motiue, as disponent vertues. Wee are in the next place to speake of the deriued motions, which arise out of these faculties. 6 These motions magneticall are either partiall, or totall. The partiall wee call that by which the parts of the Earth are magnetically moued and conformed as well one to the other, as to the whole terrestriall globe. 7 The magneticall partiall motions are Coition, Direction, Variation, and Declination. Magneti∣call Coition is that motion by which magne∣ticall bodies are ioyned and apply themselues one to the other. For the knowledge of this magneticall motion, we need goe no farther then the Iron and Steele, which wee shall obserue to moue unto the Load-stone, and cleaue vnto it, if so be it bee pla∣ced within the Spheare of his vertue. This motion is commonly called Attraction, but improperly, as is obserued by D. Gil∣bert. 1 Because Attraction seemes to suppose an externall force or violence, by which one thing is carryed and moued vnto an∣other: but the Coition is meerely naturall, as proceeding from the internall forme of both the bodies. 2 Attraction supposeth the force of mouing to bee onely in the one party, and the other to bee meerely passiue, and not actiuely concurring to this mo∣tion; whereas in the magneticall coition, both parts are mutu∣ally inclined by nature to meet and ioyne themselues one to the other. Not that the force of motion in both parts is alwayes equall: because one magneticall body is greater and stronger then the other, and then the one part seemes to stand still and draw the other vnto it, although there bee in this part so resting an inclination to the other; which mutuall inclination of con∣iunction in magnets, we may easily see in two magnets of equall quantity and vertue, which being set at a conuenient distance, will so moue, that they will meet in the mid-way. Some haue gone about to parallel this Attractiue force of the Load-stone with the Attractiue force of Ieat or Amber, which wee see by a naturall vertue to draw vnto it selfe little strawes, and other such like matter. But hee that truely vnderstands the nature of a magneticall body, shall finde a great disparity: First, because the Ieat or Amber which are comprised vnder the name of Ele∣ctricall bodies, drawes vnto it by reason of his Matter : where∣as otherwise the cause of the Magneticall Coition is to bee sought in the forme, as being too subtile a thing to spring from a materiall substance. Secondly, Electricall bodies draw and at∣tract not without rubbing and stirring vp of the matter first; and presently faile, if any vapour or thicke body should be interpo∣sed. But in a magneticall motion wee find no such matter, be∣cause it requires no such preparation or rubbing of the stone, nor is hindred by interposition of solid bodies, as wee proue in this place. Thirdly, the Load-stone moues and prouokes to mo∣tion nothing els but other magneticall bodies; but the Electri∣call will draw any little thing as straw, haire, dust, and such like. Fourthly, the Magnet will lift a great waight according to his vertue and quantity; but Ieat the smallest and lightest things. Lastly, the Electricall bodies, as Gilbert well confirmes by ex∣periments, draw other bodies vnto them by reason of a moist effluence of vapours, which hath a quality of ioyning bodies to∣gether: as wee see by the example of two stickes in water at a certaine distance, which will commonly moue till they meet to∣gether. But the magneticall coition cannot bee other then an act of the magneticall forme. Of the cause of it many Philosophers haue freely spent their vncertaine coniectures, rather out of a feare to bee esteemed ignorant, then of confidence to be accoun∣ted learned. Most run vpon the forme of the mixt body, which growes from the composition of the foure Elements; but this opinion is very feeble, and cannot goe without crouches: for sith all mixt formes grow out of the temperament and disposi∣tion; they adde nothing to the thing compounded, but diuersly modificate what was before in the simple Elements; it cannot bee imagined how such an affection as this should bee onely found in the magnet, and no other mixt body. Indeed we ascribe this affection to the forme as the immediate cause; but by this forme we vnderstand not the forme of the mixture, resulting out of the mixture and temperature of the foure qualities; but the magneticall forme of all globous bodies, such as are the Sunne▪ Moone, Starres, and this Terrestriall Spheare whereon we liue, whose natures receiued the stampe in the first creation for the preseruation of this integrity. Hee that shall seeke for the origi∣nall of all formes of this kinde in the mixture and constitution of the foure Elements, shall labour much, and finde little, and nei∣ther at last be able to content himselfe, or instruct others; except wee suppose a man sufficiently taught when hee heares ordina∣ry matters expressed in exoticke and artificiall tearmes. For my owne part, I content my selfe with a rule of Biel the Schoole∣man; That when an immediate effect proceeds from an imme∣diate cause, wee ought not to search farther why such a cause should produce such an effect. Euey man being demanded why the fire is hot, is ready to flye to the forme of fire, and alleage this as the cause: but should hee inquire further, why the forme of fire should bee the cause of heat, hee might perhaps puzzell a whole Academie of Philosophers, and neuer proue himselfe the wiser. For the further illustration of this motion, these Theo∣remes will seeme necessary. 1 The Magnet communicates his vertue to iron or steele if it be touched with it. Experience teacheth that any iron-instrument, touched with the Load-stone, receiues instantly the same vertue Attractiue. But the manner how this vertue should bee communicated on so sleight a touch, hath been controuerted. The common Philo∣sophers haue imagined, that certaine little parts of the Loadstone are separated from it in the touch, which cleauing to the iron or steele, cause this Attraction But that this vertue cannot be com∣municated by any corporall processe, or any such little parts cleauing to the iron, is not so easie to imagine: for first it seemes impossible, that with a bare touch, these parts should bee sepa∣rated from the magnet, or at least should bee so fast linked to the iron. Secondly, these parts being so little and insensible, can∣not haue so much vigour as wee see an Iron will haue at the touch of the Load-stone. Thirdly, the Loadstone can worke vpon the iron notwithstanding any body interposed, which is an eui∣dent signe that the iron it selfe is of a magneticall temper. Wherefore to shew a reason of this effect, we say; That Iron is a mettall excocted out of the Load-stone; which albeit it retaine in it selfe the vertue of the Load-stone, yet by reason of the li∣quefaction, is altogether languishing, and as it were buried; but vpon touch of a Load-stone, is stirred vp to his former vigour: for the magnet insinuats his Incorporeall influence into the iron, and so rectifies and animates that force which was almost dead. 2 The magneticall Coiton is strongest of all in the Poles. This may easily bee demonstrated by an experiment: for if the iron needle which is proposed to bee Attracted, and the Poles and Center be placed in the same right line; then this Coi∣tion will be to a perpen∣dicular, as in A and B, to wit, the Poles in the Diagramme: but in the middle space they will obliquely respect and point: and by how much farther off from the Pole it is, by so much is this vertue weaker: but in the E∣quator it selfe it be∣comes meerely parallell without any inclination at all. To know in what proportion this force is increased or weakened, we must put another ground; That the force of this coition is increased proportionally as the chords of a circle: for by how much the least chorde in a circle differs from the Diameter, so much the forces Attractiue differ from themselues. For sith the Attra∣ction is a Coition of one body with another, and magneticall bodies are carried by a conuertible nature: it comes to passe that a line drawne from one Pole to another in the diameter, direct∣ly meetes with the body, but in other places lesse, so that the lesse it is conuerted to the body, the lesse and weaker will bee the coition. 3 So much bee spoken of the magneticall Coiti∣on : It followes that wee speake of Magneticall Direction, which is a naturall conuersion and conformity of the magneticall bodies to the Poles of the Earth. It is manifest that a magneticall body so seated, that it can moue without any impediment, will turne it selfe in such wise, that the one Pole of it will respect the North Pole of the Earth, the other the South, which motion wee call Direction. This we may plainely see in a Marriners compasse, whose Lilly alwayes respects the North point. If a compasse bee wanting, the same may bee shewed in a little corken-boate, which being put in the water with a load-stone in it, will so turne and conuert it selfe, that the Poles of the Load-stone will at length point out the Poles of the Terrestriall Globe. The manner how, shall be dis∣closed in these Theoremes. 1 The South part of the Load-stone turnes to the North, and the North part to the South. To confirme this assertion, some haue produced this experi∣ment. Let there bee cut out of a rocke of Load-stone, a Mag∣net of reasonable quantity. Let the two poles both North and South bee marked out in the Load-stone, the manner of which, wee shall perhaps teach hereafter: then let it be put in a corken little boat on the water, so that it may freely float hither & thi∣ther: It will be euident that that part which in the rocke or Mine pointed Northward, will respect the South, and contrarywise the South part will respect the North ; as wee may see in this figure: Let the Magnet as it is continuated with the Mine or Globe of the Earth be AB, so that A shall be in the North pole, B the South -Pole. Let this Load-stone be cut out of this rocke or Mine▪ & placed on the water in a little timber boat, which shall be CD: we shall find that this little dish or boat will turne it selfe so long, vntill the Northpart A, be turned to the Southpart B: and on the other part, the Southpart B, be conuerted to the Northpart A: and this cōformity would the whole rock of Load-stone claime, if it were diui∣ded and separated from the Globe of the Earth. The reason why the magnet in the boat on the water, turneth, windeth, and seateth it selfe to a contra∣ry motion to that it primarily receiued, whiles it was ioyned to the bowels of the Earth, and vnited to the body of the great Magnet, is; because euery part of a Load-stone being separated from the whole, whereof it is a part, becomes of it selfe a per∣fect, compleat, magneticall body, (as we may say) a little Earth, hauing all the properties of the great Globe, as Poles, Meridi∣ans, Aequators, &c. And therefore according to the nature of magneticall vnion, spoken of in our next Theoreme, will in no wise endure to settle it selfe as it did before; but deemes it a thing more naturall, and of more perfection, to turne his aspect a contrary way, to that which he inioyed at his first constituti∣on. Here may we note a great errour of Gemma Frisius, who in his corollary vpon the 15 Chap. of his Cosmographicall Com∣ment▪ on P. Appian, affirmes; that the Needle magnetically effected, would on this side the Aequator, respect the North∣pole ; but being past the Line, would straight-way turne about, and point to the Southpole : An errour (as M r Hues saith) vnworthy so great a Mathematician. But Gemma Frisius in some ort, may be excused; for as much as the grounds of magneticall Philosophy, were in his time either not discouered, or most vn∣perfectly knowne, and the vncertaine relations of Nauigators were reputed the best Arguments: and how easie a matter it is for a Trauailer in this sort to deceiue a Scholler, who out of his reading and experience can shew nothing to the contrary, let e∣uery man iudge. 2 This contrary motion here spoken of, is the iust confluxe and conformity of such bodies to mag∣neticall vnion. This is demonstrated by Gilbert in this manner. Let the whole magneticall body be CD, then C will turne to the North of the Earth B, and D vnto the South part A. Let this magnet bee cut in twaine by the middle line or Aequator, and the point E will tend to A, and the part F, will direct it selfe to B: for as in the whole, so in the parts diuided, nature de∣sires the vnion of these bodies. The end E willingly accords with F; but E will not willingly ioyne it selfe with D, nor F with C, for then it would haue C, against its nature, to moue to∣ward A the South, or D in B▪ which is the South. Separate the stone in the place of diuision, and turne C to D, and they will conueniently agree and accord; For D will turne it selfe to the South as before, and C to the North; and E and F ioynt parts in the minerall or rocke, will now bee most sundred. For these magneticall parts concurre and meet together not by any affini∣ty of matter, but receiue all their motion and inclination from the forme ; so that the limits, whether ioynt or diuided, are dire∣cted magnetically to the Poles of the Earth, in the same manner, as in the diuided body. 3 If any part Southward of the magneticall body bee torne away or diminished, so much shall bee also diminished of the North-part; and contra∣riwise if any part bee taken away in the North-part, so much shall the vertue of the South-part be diminished. The reason is, because the Magnet hauing eminently in it the circles which are in the Earth, is separated or diuided by a mid∣dle line or Aequator, from which middle space the vertues are conueyed toward either Pole, as we haue before shewed. Now any part being taken away from the North or South part, this Aequator or middle line is remoued from his former place into the midst of the portion which is left, and so consequently both parts are lesse then before: For although these two ends seeme opposite, yet is one comforted and increased by the other. 9 Of the motions of Coition and Direction wee haue handled. It followes that we speake of the motions of the second order, to wit, Variation, and Declination. 10 Variation is the deuiation or turning aside of the directory Magneticall needle from the true point of North, or the true Meridian tow∣ards East or West. In the discourse immediatly going before, hauing treated of the magneticall body, wee haue imagined it to bee true, and pointing out the true North and South points of the Terrestriall Globe; which certainely would bee so, if the substance of the Earthly Globe were in all parts and places alike, equally parta∣king the Magneticall vertue, as some round Load-stone; nei∣ther should wee find any variation or deuiation at all from the true Meridian of the Earth: But because the Terrestriall Globe is found by Nauigatours to bee vnequally mixed with many materialls, which differ from the magneticall substance, as fur∣nished with rockie hills, or large valleyes, continents, & Ilands, some places adorned with store of iron Mimes, rocks of Load-stone, some altogether naked and destitute of these implements; it must needs fall out, that the magneticall needle and compasse directed and conformed by the Magneticall nature of the E rth, cannot alwayes set themselues vpon the true Meridian, that passeth right along to the Poles of the Terrestriall Globe; but is forced and diuerted toward some eminent and vigorous mag∣neticall part; whereby the Meridian pointed out by the mag∣net, must needes varie and decline from the true Meridian of the Earth, certaine parts or degrees in the Horizontall circle; which diuersion wee call the Variation of the compasse: so tha variation, so far as it is obserued by the compasse, is defined to bee an Arch of the Horizon, intercepted betwixt the common intersection with the true Meridian, and his deuiation. This effect proceeding from the Inequality of magneticall vertue scattered in the Earth, some haue ascribed to certaine Rockes or mountaines of Loadstone, distant some degrees from the true Pole of the World; which rockes they haue termed the Pole of the Loadstone, as that whereunto the magnet should dispose and conforme it selfe: which conceite long agoe inuen∣ted, was afterward inlarged and trimmed ouer by Fracastorius. But this opinion is a meere coniecture, without ground: for what Nauigatours could hee euer produce that were eye-wit∣nesses of this mysterie? or how can he induce any iudicious man to beleeue that, which himselfe, nor any to his knowledge euer saw? The relation that the Frier of Noruegia makes of the Frier of Oxfords discouery, recorded by Iames Cnoien in the booke of his Trauels, where he speaks of these matters, is com∣monly reiected as fabulous and ridiculous; for had there beene any such matter, it is likely he would haue left some monuments of it in the records of his owne Vniuersity, rather then to haue communicated it to a friend as farre off as Noruegia. Moreouer the disproportion in the degrees of variation in places of equall distance, will easily correct this errour, as we shall shew in due place. More vaine and friuolous are all the opinions of others concerning this magneticall variation: as that of Cortesius, of a certaine motiue vertue or power without the Heauen; that of Marsilius Fici us of a starre in the Beare ; that of Petrus Pere∣grinus, of the Pole of the world; that of Cardan, of the rising of a starre in the taile of the Beare; that of Bestardus Gallus, of the Pole of the Zodiacke ; that of Liuius Sanutus, of a certaine magneticall Meridian; of Francis Maurolycus, of a magneticall Iland; of Scaliger, of the he uen and mountaines; of Robert Norman, of a respectiue point or place: All which Writers seeking the cause of this variation, haue found it no further off then their owne fancies. More probable by farre, and conso∣nant to experience, shall wee finde their opinion, which would haue the cause of this variation be in the Inequality of the mag∣neticall Eminencies scattered in the Earth. This Inequality may bee perceiued to bee twofold. 1 in that some parts of the Earth haue the magneticall minerals more then other parts; for as much as the Superficies of some parts is solid Earth, as in great Continents: 2, Because although the whole Globe of the Earth is supposed to be magneticall, especially in the Inter∣nall and profound parts: yet the magneticall vertue belonging to those parts, is not alwayes so vigorous and eminent as in some other parts: as wee see one Load-stone to be stronger or weaker then another in vertue and power: but of those two, the former is more remarkable, which may bee shewed by experience of such as haue sailed along many seacoa-stes: for if a sea-iourney bee made from the shore of Guinea by Cape Verde by the Cana∣rie Ilands, the bounds of the Kingdome of Morocco, from thence by the confines of Spaine, France, England, Belgia, Ger∣many, Denmarke, Noruegia : we shall find toward the East, great and ample Continents; but contrarywise in the West a huge & vast Ocean: which is a reason that the magneticall needle will vary from the true point of the North, and inclines rather to the East ; because it is more probable that these Continents and Lands should partake more of this magneticall minerall, then the parts couered with the Sea, in which these magneticall bo∣dies may bee scarcer, or at the least deeper buried, and not so forceable. On the contrary part, if wee saile by the American coasts, we shall rather find the variation to be Westward: as for example, if a voyage be made from the confines of Terra Flori∣da, by Virginia, Norumbega, and so Northward, because the land butteth on the West: but in the middle spaces, neere the Canary Ilands, the directory needle respects the true Poles of the Terrestriall Globe, or at least shewes very little variation. Not for the agreement of the Magneticall Meridian of that place with the true by reason of the Rocke of Load-stone, as some haue imagined: because in the same Meridian passing by Brasile, it fals out farre otherwise: but rather because of the Terrestriall Continents on both sides, which almost diuide the Magneticall vigour, so that the Magneticall needle is not forced one way more then another; the manner whereof wee shall finde in D. Gilbert expressed in an apt figure, to whom for further satisfacti∣on I referre the Reader. 1 The Magneticall variation hath no certaine Poles in the Terrestriall Globe. It is but a common receiued errour (as we haue mentioned) that there is a certaine Rocke or Pole of Load-stone, some de∣grees distant from the true Pole of the world, which the Mag∣neticall needle in it's variation should respect. This Pole they haue imagined to be in the same Meridian with that which pas∣seth by the Azores, whence they haue la∣boured to shew the rea∣son why the Compasse should not vary in that place: which they ex∣plaine by this Figure. Let there be a circle de∣scribing the Spheare, E AF, the Horizon EF, the Articke Pole A, the Antarticke . The Pole or Rocke of Loadstone placed out of the Pole of the Earth B. Let there bee placed a magneticall directory needle in H; it will (according to their assertion) tend to the point B, by the magneticall Meridi∣an H B; which because it concurres with the true Meridian B A, or H A, there will be no variation at all, but a true direction to the North Pole of the Earth. But let this magneticall needle be placed in the point D, it is certaine, according to this opini∣on, that it will tend to the Pole of the Loadstone B, by the mag∣neticall Meridian D B. Wherefore it will not point out the Pole of the Earth A, but rather the point C; because these two Me∣ridians come not into one and the selfe-same. Hence they haue laboured with more hope then successe, o find out the longi∣tude of any part of the Earth, without any obseruation of the Heauens: which I confesse might easily be effected, if this con∣iecture might stand with true obseruation. But how farre this conceit swarues from the experience of Nauigatours, one or two instances will serue to demonstrate. For if the variation had any such certaine poles as they imagine, then would the Arch of variation bee increased or diminished proportionally according to the distance of the places. As for example; If in the compasse of an hundred miles, the Compasse were varied one degree, then in the next hundred miles it would vary another degree, which would make two degrees. But this hath often been proued otherwise by diuerse experiments of Nauigations, mentioned by Gilbert, and F. Wright. I will only produce one or two. If a ship saile from the Sorlinges to New-found-land, they haue obserued, that when they come so farre as to finde the Compasse to point directly North, without any variation at all; then passing onward, there will bee a variation toward the North-East, but obscure and little: then afterward will the Arch of this variation increase with like space in a greater pro∣portion, vntill they approach neere the ontinent, where they shall find a very great variation. Yet before they come a shoare, this variation will decrease againe. From which one instance, if there were no other, we might conclude; That the Arch of vari∣ation is not alwaies proportionable to the distance : which granted, quite ouerthrowes that conceit of the Poles of variation. Be∣side this, if there were two such magneticall Poles, there can be but one common Meridian, passing by them and the Poles of the Earthly Globe. But by many obseruations collected and ob∣serued by Ed. Wright and others, there should be many magneti∣call Meridians passing by the Poles of the world: as in the Me∣ridian about Trinidado, and Barmudas ; the Meridian about the Westermost of the Azores: lastly, the Meridian running amongst the East Indian Ilands, a little beyond Iaua Maior, the magne∣ticall and true Meridian must needs agree in one. Now for as much as all these magneticall Meridians passe by the Poles of the earth, there can no cause be assigned why the magneticall Poles should bee said to bee in one rather then another; and if in any, then in all. Whence it must needes follow, that as many magne∣ticall Meridians as you haue to passe by the true Poles of the world▪ so many paire of magneticall Poles must you haue, which will be opposite to all reason and experience. 1 The point of Variation, as of Direction, is on∣ly Respectiue, not Attractiue. It was supposed by the Ancients, that the Direction and Variation of the Loadstone was caused by an Attractiue point, which drew and enforced the lilly of the Compasse that way: which errour tooke place from another common-recei∣ued opinion, that all the other motions of the magnet were re∣duced to the Attractiue operation: but the errour was corre∣cted by one Robert Norman, an English-man, who found this point to bee Respectiue, and no way Attractiue. Whose reason or demonstration is not disapproued by D r Gilbert, although in other matters hee sharply taxeth him. His experiment is thus. Let there be a round vessell, as we haue described, ful of water; in the midle of this water-place an iron-wier, in a conuenient round corke, or boat, that it may swimme vpon the wa∣ter, euen poyzed: let this iron-wire be first touched with the load-stone, that it may more strongly shew the point of variation ; let this point of variation be D, let this iron-wire rest vpon the water in the corke for a certaine time; It is certainly true that this iron-wire in the cork, will not moue it selfe to the margent or brinke of the vessell D, which certain∣ly it would doe, if the point D were an attractiue point. 3 The variation of euery place is constant and not variable. This hath beene ratified by the experience of Nauigatours, which in the selfe-same Regions haue neuer missed the true va∣riation which they haue assigned them before. If any difference bee assigned in variation to the same Region, wee may impute it to their errour which obserued it, arising either from want of skill, or conuenient instruments. Neither can this euer be chan∣ged, except some great deluge or dissolution happen of a great part of land, as Plato records of his Atlanticke Ilands. 4 The variation is greater in places neere the poles of the Earth. This proportion is not to be taken vniuersally, but commonly for the most part; yet would it haue truth in all places, if all o∣ther things were correspondent. It is obserued that the varia∣tion is greater on the coasts of Norway, and the Low-countries ▪ then at Morocco, or Guinea. For at Guinea the magneticall needle inclines to the East, a third part of one Rumbe of the Compasse: In the Ilands of Cape-Verde, halfe; in the coasts of Morocco, two third parts: In England at the mouth of Thames, according to the obseruation of D. Gilbert, and Ed. Wright, though some de∣ny it, one whole Rumbe ; in London the chiefe city of it, eleuen degrees and more, which we also find, or thereabout, in Oxford. The reason is, because the magneticall motiue vertue is stronger in the greater latitude increasing towards the pole: and the large Regions of land lying toward the Pole, preuaile more then those which are situate farther off. 12 Thus much for the Variation. The Declination is a magneticall motion, whereby the magne∣ticall needle conuerts it selfe vnder the Hori∣zontall plaine, toward the Axis of the Earth. What wee haue hitherto spoken of Direction and Variation magneticall, was such as might be expressed and shewed in the plaine of the Horizon, by the Directory needle equally poy∣zed, when it is set in any point of the Horizon. But this Decli∣nation whereof wee are now to speake, is the motion of an iron-wire or needle, first equilibrated, and then stirred vp by the loadstone, vpon his owne Axis, from that point of the Hori∣zon, the other end of it tending toward the center of the Earth: where wee may, for the better expressing of the motion, note two things: 1 That the magneticall wier, set in a conuenient instrument, if it bee carried from the Aequator to the Pole, or from one Pole to another: will by little and little turne it selfe round, and make a circumuolution about his owne Axell. 2 That by this conuersion and circumuolution about his axell, it will according to diuers places and latitudes, make diuers An∣gles in diuers places; both which are included in this moti∣on of Declination, and are warranted by experience made by an Inclinatory needle applyed to a Terrella, or round Load∣stone; as also by the experience of Nauigations on the great Spheare of the Earth. To explaine which motion, there are cu∣rious instruments formed and inuented by D r Gilbert, and D r Ridley, which the curious in this kinde, to their greater satisfa∣ction may peruse. In the meane time wee will here content our selues with one figure following, borrowed from their more copious inuention; wherein we shall find enough to expresse the manner of this motion. In this Figure let ABCD be the Terrella or round magnet representing the Spheare of the Earth: A the North-pole, B the South, A B the Axell, CED the Aequator: AKB, and ALB the Meridian circles meeting in the Pole. AC, and BD the Meridian or right Horizon, hauing in it the two Poles: FG and HI two parallels. The Loadstone being thus designed in his outward Poles, as it is according to his na∣turall eminency stored inwardly▪ Let the Needles bee placed (being before touched) on the Limbe ouer-against the Poles, AB, and we shall obserue them to res∣pect them di∣rectly, cōcur∣ring in one straight line with the A∣xell of the Earth: Then set the same Needles in the Limbe ouer—against the Aequa∣tor CD, and they will dis∣pose & settle themselues in a parallell site to the Axell of the Earth, and in∣cline neither to one Pole or other: Hence may bee collected by plaine consequence, that there is a semi-circle betwixt each of these foure needles. Now to finde the quadrants of these, apply Needles in the Limbeat 33 degrees distant from the Aequator on each side of him, and they will make right angles with the axell of the same, where these eight needles haue 8 quadrants between them, that is, foure semi-circles which will make two whole circles, one on each side of the Aequator. But if you place the needles in the midst betweene the Aequator and the Poles, they will respect the axell but obliquely as in all other parts, ex∣cept in the eight places before-mentioned. From hence may we learne what we proposed: first that the Declination is a conuer∣sion of the magneticall wire or needle vpon its owne axell: se∣condly, that this wire by this motion so excited, if it bee moued on any Meridian North or South, will apply and conforme it selfe according to certaine angles, to the Axell of the Earth. Thirdly, there will arise this corollary, that the magneticall nee∣dle about the round Magnet, maketh two circles. Concerning this declination wee will insert two especiall Theoremes. 1 The Declination is answerable to the lati∣tude not in Equality of degrees, but in proportion. It is manifest out of that which wee haue spoken, that this motion of Declination supposeth two motions; The one of Conuersion, whereby the needle is turned round on his owne Axis : The other a Progressiue motion, whereby the center it selfe of the Inclinatory Needle is carryed forward vpon a Meri∣dian from North to South, or contrarywise. These two moti∣ons supposed to proceed and beginne together, cannot possibly meet in such Equality, as that the degrees of Declination directly answer in Equality to the degrees of latitude, which is demonstrated by this Figure here inserted. Let the magne∣ticall body bee A, this body while it shall bee moued aboue the Earth from GD the Equi∣noctiall toward the Pole B, will bee turned vpon his owne Center, and in the middle of the progresse of the center from the Equator to the Pole B, it will be directed to the Equator D in the middle betweene the two Poles. Therefore the middle must needes turne faster on his owne center, then the center it selfe turned forward; that by this conuersion it should directly respect the point D: wherefore this motion will bee swifter in the first degrees, to wit, from A to L, but in the latter it will be slower from L to B, in respect of the Aequator from D to C. Now if the Declination were equall to the latitude, then the magneticall wier should obserue and follow the facultie and peculiar vertue of the center of an operatiue and attractiue point. But reason & experience teacheth, that it obserueth the whole body and masse, with all the externall limits of the Earth and Load-stone; the whole vertues and forces of both concurring, aswell of the conuertible wier, as of the whole Earth: Neuer∣thelesse from this experiment the skilfull in Magneticall Philo∣sophie, haue found out a proportion whereby the latitude of places may instrumentally bee found out by the degrees of De∣clination. 2 The Magneticall Declination is caused not of the Attractiue, but of the Disponent and Conuersiue vertue of the Earth. There is nothing more admirable in Nature, then the order and situation of all bodies in their places, most conuenient for each ones conseruation. For the obtaining of which harmony, (as wee haue taught in our second Chapter) it is endowed with a proper motion conuenient, to place and seat it selfe, both for the preseruation of it selfe, and the whole Vniuerse. This na∣turall Inclination is no-where more eminent and cospicuous, then in the harmony of magneticall bodies, which are (as it were) the sinewes of the Terrestriall Globe. These motions some haue imputed to the Attractiue force, but very erroneously, as wee haue proued already of Direction and Variation, and shall here demonstrate concerning the Magneticall Declination : for first, if it were caused by any Attractiue force approching it would follow of necessity, that a Terrella or round Spheare; made of a solide or perfect loadstone, would more turne and wrest the magneticall needle, then if it were made of a weaker and more imperfect substance: also that a needle touched with a stronger stone, should shew a greater Declination then that touched with a weaker. But experience hath found the contrary, because the Declination will bee all one, bee the stone stronger or wea∣ker. Moreouer a Loadstone armed with an Iron-Nose (as they tearme it) put vpon the Meridian in any latitude, will not lift vp a piece of iron more perpendicularly, then if it were naked and vncouered, although it will lift vp much greater and heauier waights; which experiments are sufficient to confirme our as∣sertion, that this Declination is caused only by the disponent and conuersiue vertue of this Terrestriall Globe. 3 The magneticall Declination hath a variation. That in the magneticall Direction there is found an Irregu∣larity or variation, hath beene sufficiently warranted by Artifi∣cers Instruments. The like Irregularity is in the motion of De∣clination, which makes magneticall Instruments and experi∣ments more subiect to errour and imperfection. The variation of Declination is defined to bee an Arch of the Magneticall me∣ridian betwixt the true and apparent Declination. The cause hereof is onely to bee sought in the vnequall temper of magne∣ticall parts in the Earth. For as in the Direction, magneticall bodies are drawne and wrested from the true meridian, by the eminent and more vigorous force of the Earth, one side ouer∣ruling the other: so the magneticall needle (the conuersion somewhat increased) declines sometimes beyond his naturall site and conformity. This may cause an errour, but not of any great moment: sometimes when there is no variation or Dire∣ction at all in the Horizon, there may bee a Variation or Decli∣nation; to wit, either when the more eminent and stronger parts of the Earth are placed iust vnder the Meridian; or when these parts are more impotent then the generall nature requi∣reth; or els when the Magneticall vigour is too much increased on one side, and diminished on the other as wee may behold in the vast Ocean. CHAP. IIII. Of the Totall motions Magneticall. 1 HAuing passed the Partiall motions magneticall, wee are next to speake of the Totall motions, which more neerely agree to the whole Earth, such as are the Verticitie and Reuolution. 2 The Verticity is that whereby the Poles of the earthly Spheare, conforme and settle them∣selues vnto the Poles of the Heauen. 1 The Spheare of the Earth by her Magneticall vigour, is most firmely seated on her Axell; whose Ends or Poles respect alwayes the same points in the Heauens, without Alteration. That which in a little Magnet or Load-stone is called Dire∣ction, in the vast Globe of the Earth is called Verticity. To vn∣derstand which, wee must conceite, that the Earth hath natural∣ly two Poles, vnto which the meridionall parts doe direct not only magneticall bodies neere the Earth, but her owne massie situation and firmenesse; and settles her selfe so strongly by her magneticall vertue passing through the Meridionall parts to the Poles, as if shee were tied by many strong cables to two Herculean pillars, not subiect to alteration: And if it should happen by any supernaturall power, that the situation could bee changed: shee would (no doubt) by her magneticall vigour and verticity, returne and restore her selfe to her former position, as all magneticall needles will doe to their proper site and conformity Of this Verticity needes no more to bee spo∣ken, then hath been already said in the point of Direction ; be∣cause the former is a representation of the latter, and depends on the same demonstration. Out of which ground wee may eui∣dently conclude, that the Axell of the Terrestriall Globe re∣maynes alwayes inuariable: By which we may refute the opi∣nion of Dominicus Maria, who was Master to Copernicu ; who out of certaine vnperfect obseruations, was induced to beleeue that the Poles of the World were changed from their true and naturall situation: I haue obserued (saith hee) looking on Pto∣lomies Geographie, that the eleuation of the Pole Articke al∣most in all Regions, as it is put downe in Ptolomie, differs and failes in one degree and ten minutes from that which wee finde in our time: which cannot bee ascribed to the errour of the ta∣ble, because it is not probable that the whole series should bee depraued according to this equality of number. Wherefore it must follow of necessity, that the North pole should bee mo∣ued toward the verticall circle: which mystery not knowne of the Ancients for want of former obseruations, hath shewed it selfe to our times, being inriched not only with their, but our owne experiments. According to this opinion of Dominicus Maria, the North pole should bee eleuated higher then it was, and the Latitudes of Regions should bee greater then they were. But to this opinion we will oppose the opinion of Sta∣dius, which holdeth that the latitudes of Regions haue beene decreased and diminished from that they haue had in Ptolomie, without any such regular Increment or Decrement; which hee labours to confirme by many obseruations: as for example, the latitude of Rome as it is set downe by Ptolomie is 41 de∣grees ⅔ parts: but by newer obseruation it is found to be 41 de∣grees, ½ parts: out of which wee may well coniecture, that Ptolomies obseruations were not alwayes exactly true, being for a great part such as hee had receaued from Hipparchus, and not examined himselfe: as may bee seene in the latitude of ma∣ny Citties in Europe, where hee missed sometimes 2, some∣times 3 degrees. Wherefore no iudicious Geographer would vpon such imperfect obseruations and vncertaine coniectures bring in a new motion of the earth to ouerthrow that magne∣ticall. Harmony and consistency corroborated with so many and sure demon trations. This may serue to answer a certaine Ten nt of Vasquez the Iesuite, and some others; who imagine the Center, and by consequence▪ the Pole of the Earth, to bee moued vp and downe by a certaine motion of Liberation. The argument on which they would ground their assertion, is taken from the Center of Grauity, in this manner. The whole masse of the earth (say they) is so setled about the Center, that it is equally poized: that is as much as to say, that the parts are in∣dowed with an equall waight. Now such Bodies as are so e∣qually poized by the addition or diminution of any part on either ide▪ will bee straight-way t rned from that i e▪ which they had before in Aequîlibrio: as is dayly confirmed by expe∣rience of a Ballance, and other such mechanicke instruments. Wherefore in the Terrestriall spheare, the Center and Poles should in this wise bee changed and altered, and the whole suffer a kinde of starting or Libration. For it is manifest by dayly obseruation, that some things in the superficies of the earth are fallen off, and carried into another place: as Men, Beasts, and Birds, which moue from one place vnto another. Nothing is here of more moment then the motion of the Sea, by which the parts of the water by continuall ebbing and flow∣ing, suffer such a sensible change of Addition and Diminution, that no man can imagine how the parts of the Earth about the Center should alwayes bee equally counterpoyzed, but the waight on one side should bee predominant vnto the other, and so driue the Center from his former place. This Argument Blancanus, De Mundi fabr. part. 3. cap. 2. another late Iesuite, leaues altogether vnanswered; either imagining it too strong, or out of a combined faction of their owne society, vnwilling to contradict his fellow. And in∣deed should wee consider the spheare of the earth, no otherwise then according to his Elementary constitution: this reason would hardly admit of a solid answer: For howsoeuer in the vast frame of the Earth, the addition or subtraction of some parts would make but an insensible difference: yet can it not bee denied, but the least waight whatsoeuer added or subtra∣cted, would turne it from its Equall-poyze : Neuerthelesse, this I hold too absurd for a Christian to beleeue, for as much as it contradicts the sense of holy Scriptures, Psal. 104. which auerre the earth to bee so setled on her foundation, that shee should not at any time bee remoued, or shaken: which motion (as shall bee pro∣ued in the second Theoreme) I take to bee vnderstood of such a Trepidation of the Center and the Poles, which by a meta∣phor are tearmed the foundation of the earth, and not of the circular motion, as some haue laboured to wrest it. Wherefore nothing is here left vs to satisfie this doubt: but to haue re∣course to his magneticall verticity, whereby the poles of the Earth endowed with a magneticall vigor, and ouerswaying the elementary ponderosity of the earthly parts, are (as it were) so fast bound to respect the same points or poles in the Hea∣uens, that the Center can no wayes bee shaken, or moued out of his place. 3 The Magneticall Reuolution is a motion by which the whole globe of the Earth is moued round. Aristotle in his 1 booke de coelo makes 3 kindes of simple motions, out of which hee labours to deduce the number of simple bodies. The first is the motion from the center, such as is of Fire and Ayre, and all light bodies: the second to the cen∣ter, such as is of Earth and Water; the third is round about the center or middle, which hee ascribes to the Heauens: so that if this ground were true, the Earth could challenge to it selfe no other then the right motion; whereby the parts of it being se∣parated from the whole, returne to it againe. But this opinion although popular and plausible, hath beene contradicted, as well by ancient Philosophers as moderne: for by long experi∣ence and diligent obseruation, they haue found the earth to bee endowed with a star-like vigour, whereby shee may, hauing all her parts vnited together by reason of her grauity vnto the Center, and her place made sure by her magneticall poles, moue naturally vpon her owne poles, at least if so bee shee claime no other motion. This opinion first blosomed (as farre as I can gather) in the Schoole of Pythagoras, was cherished by Hera∣clides Ponticus, and Ecphantus, two famous Pythagoreans : to which afterward ioyned themselues Nicetus Syracusanus, and Aristarchus Samius ; all which haue vndertaken to defend that the Earth moues circularly, and that this circumgyration of the Earth causeth the rising and setting of the Sunne, as well as of other starres, although in the manner they haue not expres∣sed themselues alike, hauing inioyed as yet scarce the first dawn of knowledge. But all this while Philosophie contented her selfe with the acquaintance of a few choice friends, not daring to prostitute her treasures to popularity. But when it hapned in after times that shee was taught the language of the vulgar, and spake to the vnderstanding of each mechanicke, shee soone contracted some staines, and squared her selfe rather to please the most then the best. Thus the multitude as a vast torrent pre∣uailed against the learned, and cast into exile the inuentions of the Ancients, which their ignorance was readier to censure then vnderstand. Yet were not the seeds of this Philosophy quite ex∣tinct, but as forgotten for a time; vntill there arose Copernicus, a man of incomparable wit, who quickned and reuiued it, to his euerlasting prayse and our profit: I would not here be mistaken, as though I strongly apprehend these grounds, and reiect all the principles of our Peripateticke Philosophie: I only inueigh a∣gainst their preiudicate ignorance, which ready to licke vp the dust vnder Aristotles feet with a supercilious looke contemne all other learning, as though no flowers of science could grow in another garden. I confesse this opinion of the Earths circular motion to bee subiect to many and great exceptions, and oppo∣sed by strong and waighty arguments drawn probably from the booke of God, the touch-stone of sincere verity; yet I hold it too strongly fortified to be inuaded by popular arguments drawn from seeming sense, and bolstered vp with names and authori∣ties. For mine owne part, I confesse not absolute subscription to this opinion; yet could I not conueniently leaue it out, because hauing vndertaken to insert this Magneticall Tract; I would not willingly mangle it in any part, but shew it whole and intire to the view of the iudicious; who herein may vse their Philoso∣phicall liberty, to imbrace or reiect what they please. If these grounds seeme true, they will finde acceptance; if otherwise, it cannot indamage Truth to know her aduersary. Wherefore I thinke no man will take it amisse that I insert this following Theoreme. 1 It is probable that the terrestriall Globe hath a circular motion. Copernicus ascribes three motions to the spheare of the Earth, whereof the first is in the space of 24 houres about her owne axell; making the day and night, and is therefore called the Diurnall : The second is yeerely, wherein the Center it selfe of the Earth is moued from West to East, describing the circle of the Signes. The third is a motion of Declination performed in an annuall reuolution; reflecting against the motion of the Center; for the Axis of the Earth is supposed to haue a conuer∣tible nature, whereas if it should remaine fixt, there would ap∣peare no inequality of day and night, Spring, Autumne, Sum∣mer, or Winter: I will not here curiously distinguish the diffe∣rences; limits, and periods of these three motions, but leaue it to the skilfull Astronomer, to whom properly it appertaines: it is enough for mee to shew it probable that the Earth should challenge to it selfe a circular motion, in prosecution of which I shall labour chiefly to establish that first motion which is of the Terrestriall globe about her owne axis, which is the easiest both to beleeue and vnderstand. That I may the better expresse the grounds of this opinion, I will labour to proue these two points. 1 That this opinion is consonant to reason. 2 That it no way contradicts the sense of the Holy Scripture. The for∣mer assertion wee will againe diuide into 3 articles. 1 That the motion which wee seeke to establish in the Earth cannot with∣out much absurdity bee granted to the heauens. Secondly that it no way contradicts to nature of the Earth it selfe. Thirdly, that the arguments produced against this opinion, are not so strong, but may bee answered with probability. First therefore finding the dayly rising and setting of the Sunne, Moone, and other Starres to arise from some motion, wee are to seeke out the true subiect of this motion. It is agreed vpon by all that this subiect must bee the Heauens, which are carryed in 24 houres from East to West, or the Earth which must moue in the same time from West to East. For the first wee must take a granted of those which defend the opposite opinion these two grounds 1 That the subiect of this motion (if it bee a heauenly body) is the first moueable and supreame spheare of all the celestiall ma∣chine; because all the rest haue assigned them their seuerall motions. 2 That of two bodies circularly mouing vpon the same Center, in the same space of time, that which is greater in quantity must needs haue the swifter motion; as wee see the spokes of a wheele to moue faster neere the circumference, but slower in those parts which are ioyned to the Center. This granted, wee shall find the greatest of the first and supremest orbs to bee so incomparably vast in proportion to the Earth, and the motion of it according to this magnitude to bee increa∣sed to such a swiftnesse, as must needes transcend all fiction and imagination. For besides the two Elements placed by the Peripa∣ etickes betwixt the Earth and the Celestiall bodies, to wit, Aire and Fire, which challenge no meane distance betwixt their concaue and conuexe superficies : who knowes not how many distinct and strange concamerations of Orbes and circles are placed and signed ou betwixt the Moone and the first Moueable? Aristotle hath reduced all the Orbes to eight. whereof seuen were allotted to the seuen Planets, but the eight to the fixt Starres, which hee supposed to bee fastned as so ma∣ny nailes in the same wheele. But Ptolomie perceiuing this number to bee insufficient to satisfie his obseruations, was infor∣ced to adde a ninth to encrease the number. Yet this contented not Alphonsus, but hee must make vp tenne. And although this opinion preuailed a long time in the Schooles of Philosophers, as most exact and absolute; yet came it farre short to satisfie the search of two latter Astronomers, Clauius, and Maginus ; who to adde something to Antiquity, haue found out another orbe, and so the whole tale is become eleuen: and much it is to bee feared that the big-swolne belly of this learned Ignorance, will beget more children to help the Mother, because all the former haue proued lame and impotent: God send her a safe deliuery. To returne to my purpose; all these orbs thus ranged and conca∣merated in order, cannot but haue each of them a great and ex∣traordinary thicknesse and profundity: being to carry in them such huge and vast bodyes, as the Sunne and Starres, which are of themselues mighty Globes, for the most part greater then the Earth, as Philosophers haue found out by diuers Mathe∣maticall instruments, and expressed in Tables. Also because a∣mongst the Planetary Orbes wee shall finde them clouen into many partiall and lesser Orbes, as Epicycles and Excentrickes, the first of which must in reason surpasse the thicknesse of the Diameter of the Planet. The profundity of all these Orbes is measured by their Diameters, which wee shall find to surmount each other in extraordinary proportion. For the Diameter of the Earth is 1718 German miles. The greatest distance or e∣longation of the Moone being new, 65 semi-diameters of the Earth; the least is 55 semi-diameters. The greater elongation of the Moone in the middle space is 68; the least 52 semi-dia∣meters of the Earth. Notwithstanding it is very probable, that the Orbe of the Moone is yet of more thicknesse and profun∣dity. To passe ouer Venus and Mercurie, and come to the Sunne, wee shall find his distances from the Earth in his greatest Excentricity to bee 1142 semi-diameters of the Earth. Mars, Iupiter, and Saturne, are yet farther off from the Earth, and their Orbes endowed with a greater treasure of thicknesse. The distance of the Firmament wherein are placed the fixt Starres, is by the best Mathematicians thought incomprehensible, and not measurable by mans industrie: in so much that Aristotle holds the Earth no other then as a point, if it bee compared with the eighth Spheare, which hee supposed to bee the highest and first Moueable. To let passe the ninth Spheare; the tenth, which was vulgarly thought the first Moueable, if it bee valued according to the proportion of the rest, would haue his conuexe superfi∣cies moued so fast in one houre, that it would ouercome so much space as 3000 greater circles of the Terrestriall Globe ; for as much as in the conuexe superficies of the starry Firma∣ment, it would containe more then 1800. And who can bee so sharpe sighted to see the profundity and thicknes of this orbe▪ containing in it starres innumerable; whereof some are appa∣rent to each mans eyes, others lying hid by reason of the distance, whereof many haue lately beene discouered, by reason of the Trunk-spectacle lately found out: so that it may bee a pro∣bable coniecture, that all these starres are not placed in the same Orbe, or at least that this Orbe is farre greater and dee∣per then the ordinary current of Astronomers haue imagined it to bee. To these eight Orbes here deciphered, should wee adde the Caelum Chrystallinum, the Primum Mobile, the Idol of our common Astrologers ; and another, which Clauius and Ma∣ginus haue inuented; what bound should wee set to the greatne of the Heauens, or the swiftnesse of their motions? how farre beyond all rouing imagination or Poeticall fictions should it transcend, as thatwhich neither Nature could euer suffer, or the wit of man vnderstand? a motion a thousand-fold swifter then the flight of a bullet from a peece of ordinance, I had al∣most said, then thought it selfe: For if a man cast his imagina∣tion on some marke or degree in the Sunnes parallell on theTer∣restriall Globe, and so instantly transferre it to another, and so to a third, passing ouer at each time the distance of 100 miles; hee would find the Sunne to bee farre swifter in his moti∣on, and to haue ouer-passed him incomparably in his course: were the Sunne placed in the superficies of the Earth, and his course no greater then one of the greater circles of the Terrene Globe, hee should by their owne computation, finish his course in 24 houres; and so runne 21600 miles in that time, which maketh 900 miles in one houre. And if this motion seeme so swift, that it could hardly haue credit among ordinary capaci∣ties; what should wee thinke of this motion, which is imagi∣ned infinitely swifter? If Ptolomie feared lest the Globe of the Earth should be dissolued and shattered in pieces by a far slower motion; of what should wee imagine the heauens to be made, which can suffer so portentous and incogitable a whirling? Here the common Philosopher stands astonished, and rather then hee will be thought to know nothing, hee will say any thing: why (saith he) should wee not beleeue it? sith the Heauens in their motion find no Resistance, whereas all other bodies are slacked by the medium or Aire by which they are to moue. If in the Hea∣uens were any such let or hinderance, it would bee either in the Agent or Mouer; or in the Patient or body moued: Not in the mouer, because (as Aristotle hath taught) the Heauens are mo∣ued or turned round by an Angell, or Intelligence, fixed to his Orbe, of a spirituall and immateriall substance, which in a body meetes no opposition. Not in the body moued: because of it's owne Nature it is prone and inclinable to this motion. But this reason is like a reed that hurts his hand that leanes on it: for first, what indigence or necessity in Nature is obserued so great, to bee the father of such Intelligences? What serious iudgment can euer imagine the Angels to bee like gally-slaues chained fast to their gallies, or turne-spit-dogs labouring in their wheeles? To what vse shall they serue? not to stirre vp and beginne the motion; for why should we debarre the Heauens from the pri∣uiledge ofall other Bodies farre lesse excellent, whose motions challenge no other cause or beginning then their owne forme and nature: Not to Regulate and confine this motion; for Na∣ture which beginnes any action or motion, is able of her selfe to set limits and bounds vnto it, without the helpe of any ex∣ternall agent. Finally not to continue this motion; for as wee are taught in our Philosophie, Euery Naturall Agent, if it bee not hindered, still acts to the vttermost of his power, and there∣fore needes no externall coadiutor to continue his action: for o∣therwise we might suppose the Heauens to grow weary and faint in their intended course. Secondly, whereas they say there can bee no Resistence in the body moued, they contradict their owne grounds: for it is agreed by all, that the higher Orbs doe turne and wrest about the lower: I would willingly aske, by what kinde of action, either by a vertuall influence or emana∣tion, or els by a corporall touch and application: The former is improbable, and (as farre as I can gather) not auuouched by any; and were it so, it would seeme ridiculous; for why should wee rather ascribe this effect to an vnknowne in∣fluence of an externall body, then to the vigour of his owne forme and nature. For if one orbe in this sort can moue another, why could it not moue it selfe, being more present to it selfe then any other; If they say by a corporall application of bodies and their parts. I see not how they can auoid this Renitencie and reaction, which alwayes doth suppose some resistence: for how can one solide and hard body bee imagined to heaue and push another forward without some reluctancy in the pati∣ent? because the inferiour Orbe hauing of it selfe a proper mo∣tion, this must needes be violent, as supposing a forcing & wre∣sting of Nature from her proper course, whereof it is not hard to shew a sensible demonstration; because the Orbe naturally directed one way, is turned and directed another way at the same time: which both motions concurring in the same body, must needes offer violence one to the other. Moreouer the im∣munity from corruptible qualities granted to the Heauens, which is the ground of this opinion; hath beene muh talked of a∣mongst the Aristoteleans ▪ but neuer warranted by any certaine demonstration: wee see (say these Philosophers) the Heauens to haue remained since the beginning of the World, without a∣ny sensible alteration and change: and therefore must all the E∣lementary and corruptible qualities bee excluded. To disproue this, I need goe no farther then the last Comet, which Mathema∣ticians by the parallax found to bee in the heauens. And where∣as otherwise they seeke a sensible alteration in other parts, they deceiue themselues: for as in the earth whereon wee dwell, howeuer the parts interchangeably corrupt and ingender dayly, yet the whole Globe will apparantly remaine the same, keeping it's integrity: so may it happen to many of the superiour Globes, whose parts dayly corrupted and renewed againe (although, for the great distance, to vs insensible) the whole Globe remai∣neth still perfect in his perfect Sphericity. I cease any further to inuade anothers Prouince, and therefore descend to a second argument, to proue this extraordinary, violent, and swift mo∣tion in the heauens to bee improbable. It is ordinarily obserued in other Orbes of the heauens, that the higher the Orbe is pla∣ced, the motion is slower; as for example, the Spheare of the Moone, which is next the Earth, is carried about in 27 dayes. Mercury and Venus are slow enough in their course, as the for∣mer in 80 dayes, the latter in 9 moneths: the Sunne in a yeere; Mars in 2 yeeres; Iupiter in 12; Saturne in 30. Also those A∣stronomers which giue the fixt starres a motion, would haue them to finish their course, according to Ptolomie, in 36000: but if wee will beleeue Copernicus, in 25816 yeeres: so that the higher and greater the circles be, so much slower will be the motion: what iniury were it then to the concord and harmony of Nature, to impose vpon the highest Orbe of all, such an vn∣measurable strange motion, which might strike the most S ra∣phick Angell into admiration? To these may bee added other Arguments in Copernicus, which albeit they be not demonstra∣tiue, will make the matter more probable. First, that Nature in all things is a compendious and short worker, and vseth not many helpes for such thinges as may bee performed by fewer: and therefore need wee not to vse the helpe of so many Orbes and concamerations to square our obseruations, which will find more steady footing in this one ground once granted, of the Earth's circular motion: Secondly it will seeme more conso∣nant and agreeable to Nature, that the highest and vttermost Spheare of all, which bounds and engirts in all the World be∣sides, should rest quiet and vnmoueable, then to suffer such an intollerable motion, as might endanger the whole Fabricke. Lastly, I may adde this one, that this diurnall motion, granted to the first Moueable, can in my iudgement hardly stand with the regularity of heauenly Bodies, if wee expresse it no o∣therwise then the ordinary sort of Astronomers. For a regular motion is defined, to bee that whereby in equall times a body is moued through equall places. But this Diurnall motion re∣ceiued from the first Moueable, concurring with the Sunnes an∣nuall motion, will exclude this equality. For first it is granted, that the Sunne in his motion from the Aequator, to the Tro∣picke, according to sense, runnes uery day in a distinct parallell : for although euery minute hee declines somewhat from the Aequator toward the Tropicke, yet the difference is not sen∣sible: so that wee may well euery day assigne a parallelll-in to the Sun's motion. Secondly, they must grant that these pa∣rallells are diminished, and grow lesse and lesse toward the Tropicke, from the Aequator. Thirdly, that (as wee haue fore∣shewed) of two bodies mouing in the same time on the same center, that should moue faster, which is greater: so one body mouing in diuerse vnequall circles, in equall time, it must of necessity follow that it must needes moue faster, in that which is greater: here wee may conclude, he moues faster in the Ae∣quator, then in the Tropicke, because in the one hee is carryed in a greater parallell, in the other a lesse, and yet in the same pe∣riod of time, as wee may see in this Figure following. Let the Sunne bee in the point of the Eclipticke A, it is manifest that he will sensibly moue for that day in the parallell AP. Then let him bee moued by his periodicke motion, into the point of the Eclipticke B, it will for that moment moue in the parallell IBO. Last of all, let it bee in the point of the Aequator C. his pa∣rallell will bee HCL. It is manifest out of our for∣mer grounds, that he will be moued slowest in AP. Faster in IO. Fastest of all in HCL. Which swiftnesse and slownesse in the Suns motion makes it irregular. Some haue thought to salue this by saying that this motion is Regular because in equall time, the Sunne goes proportionall, not equall spaces, which Aguillonius holds in his Opti ks. But this shift is friuolous; because it takes not away the obiection, why the Sunne should moue faster and slower▪ For the Heauens being a naturall, not a voluntary agent; and according to these grounds finding no hinderance or impe∣diment; must alwayes worke to his vtmost power, and so can∣not slacke or increase his action, or motion, that it should moue faster or slower. Hitherto haue wee shewed that this Diurnall motion cannot without some absurdity bee granted to the hea∣uens: in the next place we are to shew, that it no way can crosse the Naturall disposition of the Earth it selfe, which wee shall demonstrate in this manner. If this circular motion should crosse the disposition of the Earthly Globe, it would happen either immediatly in respect of the meere Nature, which the Logicians call à priore ; or els in regard of certaine properties, which follow necessarily the Nature of it, which they terme à posteriori. If they say it happens à priori in regard of the meere Nature▪ they must necessarily haue recourse to the proprieties and accidents for a demonstration: For the Internall formes of all things being in themselues insensible, cannot be discouered vn∣to vs but by their externall proprieties▪ But if probable conie∣cture may here find any place, I see no reason why the earth be∣ing found to bee of a magneticall temper, should not challenge the same which other magneticall Globes farre greater then the Earth, possesse; to wit, a circular reuolution about her owne Poles; which Kepler and Galileus haue obserued aswell in the Sunne, as Iupiter ▪ and in like matters to iudge alike, seemes more warrantable, then to faigne a dispa ity, which Nature ne∣uer grounded, or obseruation found. But this, as a matter of small note, I easily passe ouer, following the foot-steps of our Aduersaries, which seeke to demonstrate the Earth's stability out of the externall effects and proprieties. If then this Reuolu∣tion contradict any proprietie▪ it must bee of necessity either in regard of the Quantity and Magnitude ; or els in respect of the figure and quality, or of some Motion, or of the si e and positi∣on; for I find no other propriety of any moment which can enter into this consideration: First, that the Quanti y can no way thwart this circular Reuolution, is manifest, because it would happen either in that it were too Great, or too Little. It cannot be by reason of the greatnes; because the great globes of the Sunne and Iupiter, manifold greater then the Globe of the Earth; are by late experiments of the Trunk-spectacle, found to moue about their owne▪ Axell in a small portion of time: the like haue others deli ered of the Mo n and Venus ▪ It is not then the Masse or quantity which can hinder it in the Earth; neither on the other side can it bee the smalnesse : for bodies smaller are found as apt, or rather apter to receiue a circular motion, which they will not deny mee; and therefore cannot this be preiudici∣all to the motion of the Earth. In the next place the figure of the Earthly Globe cannot hinder this motion, because by all sound Philosophers, being acknowledged to bee Sphericall, it cannot but bee deemed most apt to receiue Reuolution ; in so much as some haue hence laboured to draw an argument for the Earths circular motion, as deeming this Figure to bee giuen to the Earth for no other end or vse. Thirdly, no Quality in the Earth can resist this circular motion; for this quality (by the consent of all) would bee the naturall heauines or waight of the Earth: But this heauines takes not away the naturall Reuo∣lution: 1 Because Grauity or heauinesse is nothing els but the inclination of the parts of the Earth, returning to their na∣turall place, hauing beene sequestred from it: but these parts hauing once regained their proper places, moue no farther, nor are in those places esteemed heauy, or waighty: whence it is commonly said amongst the Peripatetickes, Nihil grauitat in suo loco, nothing is heauy in his owne place, which may easily bee demonstrated out of Staticke principles, whereby we finde heauinesse and lightnesse to bee giuen to the bodies according to the medium, and their massinesse and solidity in respect of one to the other. 2 If this heauinesse bee opposed to the circular motion then either immediatly by it selfe, or secondarily by some concomitant accident. It cannot bee the first, because grauity is a quality; but motion; an action; which for ought my Philoso∣phy hath taught mee, are not opposite▪ If by reason of some ac∣cident; then (no question) because it is contrary to lightnesse or leuity, which seemes requisite to such a motion: We willingly yeeld this naturall grauity of the parts of the Earth to stand op∣posite to the motion of Ascent or mouing vpward from the Center; but neuerthelesse it is not any way contrary to the cir∣cular motion: 1 Because contraries are alwayes supposed to be in eodem genere, in the same kind: but the motion of heauy bo∣dies to the Center, and of the Earth about the Center, are not in the same kinde, the one being a right motion, the other circu∣lar ; neither can the waight of the Terrestriall masse adde or diminish any thing in regard of the circular motion, because a Sphericall and a right motion cannot either directly concurre, or directly oppose one the other. 2 Wee may vrge out of the 4 Chap. of Aristotles 1 booke De Calo, That no ci cular motion can admit of contrariety: which hee confirmes by a demonstra∣tion, which wee forbeare here to insert, being loath to roue too farre from our present matter. At length wee will proue that this orbicular motion giuen vnto the Earth, cannot ouerthrow or thwart any other motion of the Earth: for if this were so, it would happen for one of these two respects; Either because the Earth hath some motion or other contrary to this; or els because diuers motions cannot bee in the Earth. The first cannot be true, for that wee haue spoken before; because the right mo∣tion they finde in the Earth, cannot bee iudged contrary to the Sphericall ; neither can the later bee admitted as an vndoubted truth; for howsoeuer Aristotle sets it downe for an Axiome, that one simple body hath but one simple motion, yet being abso∣lutely vnderstood without any limitation, will bee found by ex∣perience false: for it is manifest out of the experiment of the new Perspicils, that the Bodies of the Sunne and Iupiter, simple in nature, (if wee beleeue Aristoteleans ) haue at least a double motion, the one vpon their owne Poles lesse then Diurnall, the other of their Centers, which are moued from the West vnto the East, vpon other Poles familiarly knowne vnto Astrono∣mers. The Peripatetickes heere seeke an euasion, by distingui∣shing the motions of the Planets into a proper or naturall, and Accidentall or mutuaticious: but this answer comes not home to this present question. First, because these two motions of the Sunne and Iupiter will easily bee proued to bee naturall and without violence, or restraint: Secondly, because in this ans∣wer they suppose the Heauens to bee cut and diuided into di∣uerse Orbes, Sections, and Con amerations, which later Astro∣nomers vpon better experience haue derided, or at least omit∣ted as Hypotheses or suppositions, to settle Imagination, rather then reall, or true grounds. If they would vnderstand this Prin∣ciple of Aristotle, to wit▪ That one simple body should challenge one simple motion : of a motion of the same kinde it might per∣haps obtaine some credit. But the right motion of the parts ioyning to the whole, and the Circular motion: also the Cir∣cular motion of a Planet about his owne Axell, and the Circu∣lar motion it selfe about the Earth, are found to bee diuerse kindes, and therefore no way incompatible in the same subiect. Moreouer what infallible argument can perswade vs, that the Globe of the Earth is a meere simple Body, such as Aristotle describes vnto vs in his Philosophie? Either this imaginary simplicitie must bee sought in the Reall Existence of the Earth, or els in our mentall Abstraction. The former they cannot a∣uerre, because not only the Elements themselues, by their owne confession, are impure and corrupted: But the whole Globe of the Earth seemes to consist of diuerse mixtures, and Hetero∣geneall bodies, which apparantly exclude such simplicity If they would haue it rather to consist in the Abstraction or se∣paration of the minde, which may diuide and distinguish be∣tweene the true nature of the Earth, and his Accidentall Na∣tures; I shall not contradict: although it seeme ather grounded on imaginary coniecture, then experience: That the Earth of it selfe distinguished from the waters, should haue any such simple Nature. If wee follow reason and experience as our Guides, wee shall obserue in the Terrestriall Globe a twofold constitu ion; The one Elementary from the parts whereof it consists, out of which it cannot challenge any motion, but the right, which is of the parts separated from the whole, agreeing to the Earth▪ Water, and all other heauy bodies thereof consi∣sting. The other magneticall, wherein all other bodies are vni∣ted in one Magneticall forme of the Earth. In which sort the whole Globe of the Earth may bee termed a Homogeneall sub∣stance; for howsoeuer the matter and the Elements whereof it consists▪ seeme Heterogeneall and diuerse one from the other; yet since in this Magneticall Nature, there is a Harmony and Communion, well wee may call it a Homogenity of the Forme and Nature; not of the Matter and Quantity, as common Phi∣losophers commonly vse the word: So that euery part or Ele∣ment whereof this Terrestriall Spheare is compounded, may claime his owne motion, and properly; yet all conspiring in one vniuersall forme of a Sphericall Body, may notwithstanding be turned round with a Sphericall motion. In the last place wee are to proue that this Circular motion granted vnto the Earth, can no way oppose or indanger the naturall site or position of the Earth: If the situation or position were feared to bee chan∣ged, it must needes happen one of these wayes; either that the Center of the Earth should bee moued out of his place: or that the parts should bee separated & distracted one from the other; or that the Poles should be changed and altered: The first can∣not touch our assertion; because in this place wee affirme not, that the center of the Globe is moued out of his place; but that the whole Earth in the same place is turned round vpon her owne Center. For the opinion of Copernicus, which holdes the Center of the Earth to moue round about the earth, wee shall censure in our next Chapter▪ In the second place, the parts of the Earth by this motion cannot bee separated or disunited one from the other: first, because all the parts are vnited to the whole by their naturall grauity; that if by chance they should bee separated, they would naturally returne backe vnto their owne place. Secondly, this motion is supposed Naturall & not violent, which in so great and massie a Body, can make no sen∣sible Alteration. Lastly, the Poles of the Earth by this meanes, cannot bee moued out of their places; because by a certaine Magneticall verticity (as wee haue formerly shewed) the same Poles of the Earth alwayes naturally respect the same points of the Heauens, as if they were bound vnto two firme Pillars indissoluble. Hitherto hauing proued the Circular mo∣tion of the Earth; neither to bee giuen to the Heauens without some absurdity, and yet no way to contradict or oppose the Nature of the Terrestriall Globe; wee are in the third place to examine the reasons vsually vrged against this Assertion. The first reason is drawne from sense. If there were any such Spheri∣call motion (say they) how comes it to passe, that it cannot of vs bee perceiued? an Argument worthy such Philosophers, as measure all rather by seeming sense, then Demonstratiue reason; who cannot obserue on the sea in a calme, that the ship wherein hee is carried will seeme to rest, or at least to moue slowly▪ and the clifts and shores to moue vnto the opposite part? What then should wee thinke of the motion of the whole Terrestriall Globe? which hath lesse cause to bee percei∣ued, then that of a ship? The Bulke of a ship in respect of the Earth is small and of no quantity; the other being huge and massie: The motion of the ship meerely violent, inforced by the windes; of the Earth naturall and vniforme, stirred vp of his proper and naturall inclination, so that if any such motion be in the earth, it were impossible to bee perceiued by sense: Se∣condly, they vrge against vs, that in Homogeneall Bodies, there is the same motion of the whole, and all the parts : But euery part of the Earth (as experience teacheth) is moued downe∣ward toward the Center, and therefore the whole can haue no other motion: To this obiection wee haue partly answered be∣fore; yet to giue further satisfaction, wee will adde something more: It is one thing to speake of the whole Terrestriall Globe and Spheare; another of the seuerall parts and Elements where∣of it consists: If the whole Spheare bee vnderstood, wee ascribe vnto it no other motion but the circular, which wee here labor to establish. The parts, whereof this Terrestriall Spheare consists, may bee considered two wayes; either as they are vnited in the whole by a Magneticall forme, or disioyned and taken by them∣selues: In the former the parts of the Earth are supposed to moue in the same motion, by which the whole Spheare of the Earth is moued; because the whole and all the parts taken together, are the same, and subiect to the same circular reuolution. Not∣withstanding this, any part seuerall and disioyned from the whole, hath a right motion downeward toward the Center, by which it returnes to its true naturall vnion. This inclination of the parts agrees not with the whole Earth, neither vnto any part vnited and conglobated to the whole; but onely to a part separated from his place; so that the whole, may notwithstan∣ding in his place inioy a circular motion. Now to come more neerely home vnto their Arguments drawne from the Homo∣geneity of the Earth, wee answer as before, that there is a two∣fold Homogeneity : The one of the matter and quantity; the o∣ther of the Magneticall forme and Nature of the former: wee may conclude out of the right motion of all the parts, the dis∣position of the whole, so wee vnderstand it in a good sense: first that euery part is here to bee vnderstood, not in, but out of his proper place: Secondly, that by the whole, wee ought not to vnderstand the whole Globe with all his parts, conformed in one Sphericall frame; but all the parts indefinitely taken; for if wee should vnderstand of the whole Globe, their Argument will in no way hold true: If according to the later, wee might well grant them their Conclusion, yet can it not oppugne our Assertion: Because it will follow out of the Naturall inclinati∣on of euery part, that all the parts seuerally taken, haue such a disposition of returning to the Earth, being separated there from: Yet will not this by any necessary inference bee proued to agree to the whole Globe of the Earth; but rather will it follow contrarywise, that the whole Spheare of the Earth is moued circularly, and therefore euery part with, and in it, is moued with the whole in the same motion. A third argument which is thought greater then all the other, is drawne from two experiments: The first is, that a stone or Bullet let fall from a higher place to the ground, will perpendicularly descend to the point of the Earth right vnder: Secondly, that two Bullets imagined to bee of equall weight and matter, being dischar∣ged from equall pieces of ordinance, with the like quantity of powder, the one towards the East, the other towards the West, will reach an equall distance in the Earth; both which would seeme impossible if wee grant this supposition of the Earths circular reuolution. For in the former case, the Earth sliding away swiftly during the fall of the stone, would change the point marked out for another: And in the second, for the like cause, the Bullet shot towards the East, being preuented by the swiftnesse of the Earth's motion, carrying along with it the Ordinance out of which it proceeded, should returne backe ouer the shooters-head; and contrarywise that Bullet shot to∣wards the West, besides his owne motion, by the motion of the Earth the other way, should bee carryed so much farther, as the Earth is remoued from the place where it was first dis∣charged: Both which experiments seeme to crosse this cir∣cumgyration of the Terrestriall Globe, which our magneticall Cosmographers labour to confirme: But with them to giue an answer to these and the like experiments, wee must distin∣guish the parts of the Earth into three sorts; some are hard and solide parts, adioyned to the Globe, as stones, mineralls, & what else in the bowels of the Earth is vnited to it, or at least necessa∣rily adherent to the outward face of it. Some other parts there are of a thinne and fluid substance, as the Aire and other va∣pours in it, deriued from the Earth; A third sort there are of such parts as being in themselues solide, are notwithstanding by some violence separated from the solide globe, as stones cast into the Aire; Arrowes, Bullets, and such like, discharged from the hand or Engine: For the two former wee may easily ima∣gine them carried with the same circular motion, which we as∣signe vnto the whole, being no other then the parts of it depen∣ding from the whole masse: For the third sort (whereof con∣sists the difficulty) wee cannot imagine them so moued round, as if they were wholly separated from the Communion of the Earthly Spheare; for howsoeuer there seemes a separation ac∣cording to matter and quantity, yet retaine they the same mag∣neticall inclination to the whole masse, as if they were vnited to it; and therefore such solide parts are moued with the same vniforme and naturall motion wherewith the Earth it selfe is turned; so that in solide bodyes so separated from the superfi∣cies of the Earth, of an Arrow or Bullets shot, wee must ima∣gine a twofold motion: The one Naturall & vniforme, where∣by they are moued as homogeneall parts according to the reuo∣lution of the whole Spheare: The other violent by force im∣pressed from the Agent: The right motion proceeding from the strength of the shooter, cannot crosse or hinder the Naturall, be∣cause the one being right, and the other circular, admit no such proportion, as that one should hinder or further the other: Nei∣ther can these motions well be tearmed contrary or opposite, which are in diuers kindes: To explaine this matter farther, we will adde this Diagramme; L t the whole orbe of the earth bee imagined to bee LQM; whose center is A, the thicknesse of the Aire ascending from the Earth O Q. Now as the orbe of this fluid substance of the aire ascēding vni∣formely is moued round with the Globe of the earth, so must wee imagine the part of it marked out by the right line OQ to bee carried round with an vnal∣terable Reuolution. Wherefore if any heauy body should bee placed in the Line OQ; as for example P, it will fall downe toward the center by the shortest way in the same line OQ: which motion downewards towards the center, can neither bee hindered by the circular motion of the Earth, nor yet Mixt or compounded with it: It cannot bee hindred: because (as wee haue shewed) a Right motion and a circular being not in the same kind, cannot properly bee reputed contrary: Neither for the same cause can they bee mixt or compounded: Wherefore this motion will be no other then one simple and Right motion, neuer varying from the Line OQ: which being once vnder∣stood, it is no hard thing to imagine a Bullet or stone forced by equall strength from Q towards L, and from Q. to∣wards the point M, to obserue alwayes a like distance notwith∣standing the Earth's cir ular Reuolution. Hauing hitherto shew∣ed this Sphericall motion of the Earth to bee possible, and no way to contradict Nature, wee are in the next place to shew it to bee no way opposite to the sense of holy Scripture. This opinion of the Earth's circular motion, hath suffered much wrong by a certaine perswasion of some men, that it contra∣dicts the Text of Holy Scripture. Some precise men▪ mor ready to vrge, then vnderstand what they alleage, will condemne without examination, and sticke to the plaine l tter, notwith∣standing all absurdities, denying the conclusion in despight of the premisses. To these haue associated themselues another sort, more to bee regarded, as more learned; the Critickes (I meane) of our Age, who like Popes or Dictatours, haue taken vpon them an Vniuersall authority to censure all which they neuer vnder∣stood. Had these men contained thēselues in their own bounds, they might questionlesse haue done good seruice to the Com∣monwealth of Learning▪ But when the seruant presumes to controle the Mistrisse, the house seemes much out of order. To seeke for a determination of a Cosmographicall doubt in the Grammaticall resolution of two or three Hebrew wordes, (which some haue gone about) were to neglect the kernell, and make a banquet on the shells. But howsoeuer, we hope to make it appeare, that the Scripture vnderstood as it ought to bee, is so farre from fauouring their opinion, that the words them∣selues can hardly admit of such a sense, as they would fasten on them. But ere wee descend to the examination of particular places of holy Scriptures alleaged in their behalfe, wee will shew this opinion to bee much different from that of Coperni∣cus, as somewhat more moderate, and able to suffer an easier re∣concilement with the holy Text. For the places alleaged of sa∣cred Scripture, which seeme to oppose our Assertion, either seeme to proue the circular motion of the Heauens, or the rest, and stability of the Earth. But this opinion holding a Mediocri∣ty betwixt both, neither takes away the motion from the Heauens, neither oppugnes such a Rest or quietnesse in the Earth, as the Scriptures vnderstand. For first, albeit wee take away from the Heauens the diurnall motion, and giue it to the Earth: yet we grant to the heauenly Orbes their seuerall mo∣tions, allowing no part of it to bee absolutely voide of motion, Secondly, wee must vnderstand this in a fourefold sense; as op∣posed to foure kindes of Motions. First to the progressiue Mo∣tion of the Center of the Terrestriall globe from place to place. Secondly, to the separation or dissolution of the parts one from the other, by which the Globe may loose his integrity. Thirdly to the Translocation of the Poles, whereby the Poles inclining to one side or another, may bee imagined to change their posi∣tion. Fourthly, to the Diurnall Motion. In the first sense wee giue a Rest and stability to the Earth, because the Earth, how∣soeuer moueable, wee place in the Center of the world, as wee shall proue in the next Chapter. In the second sense we also grant it; because all the parts of the Earth being of a heauy nature, fall naturally downewards▪ and vnite themselues vnto the whole, to decline such a dissolution: In the third acception wee likewise allow such a stability: because the Poles of the Earth (as wee haue shewed) by their magneticall inclination, alwayes respect the same points in the heauens, and can from thence by no meanes remooue themselues. Only in the fourth and last sense wee exclude a Rest, allowing onely a diurnall Re∣uolution from West to East in twenty foure houres. The first argument alleaged against vs is taken out of the 1 Chap∣ter of Ecclesiastes: Vna generatio (saith Salomon ) abit, & al∣tera aduenit, quamuis. Terna in saeculum permaneat. Wherein by the word which some interpret (Stat▪) they would inferre a perpetuall stability of the Earth. A childish conse∣quence, which a graue Diuine might well bee ashamed to vrge: euery man of common vnderstanding may plainely perceiue that Salomons scope in this Chapter was, to shew the vanity & vncertainty of all things vnder the Sunne: which as a speciall ar∣gument amongst others hee amplifies from the success ie muta∣tion and changes of men liuing on the Earth: in that one gene∣ration goeth away, and another commeth, but the Earth keeps her integrity, and remaines in the same state. This Constancy then, or remaining of the earth, we can in no wise oppose to a∣ny circular motion, but to the changes and vncertainty of men in their generations; in which sense our most learned Linguists vnderstand it. Would not this seeme to any man a ridiculous argumentation, if any man should thus dispu e: One Miller comes, and another goes, but the Mill remaines still: Ergo the Mill hath in it no motion? Or in a Riuer, one generation of Fishes is produced, and another is decayed; but the Riuer re∣maines the same, Ergo the Riuer remaines still vnmoued? Let any man goe no farther then the plaine wordes whereon these Grammarians stand, hee will easily find out another interpreta∣tion. For the word deriued from signifies as much as to persist, subsist, or to endure, being opposite to which signifies as much as to stagger or start aside from his place, or position: so that nothing from hence can bee inferred to contradict the Sphericall Reuolution of the Earth in her proper place, vpon her owne Poles, which we only maintaine. A second reason they draw from the Psalme 104, Fundauit Terram su∣per bases su∣as, ne dimo∣ueatur in saeculum. vers. 5. out of these words, wherein, (as one would perswade) no lesse then three argu∣ments are couched in three bare termes: But these arguments will (I feare) proue as little as the former. For first the word signifying as much naturally as to found or seat in a place or frame, is not altogether, without a Metaphor giuen to the Earth, because Almighty God hath so placed it vpon her owne center Poles and Axell, that shee cannot bee moued out of it: Likewise implyes no other then a seat or place, being deriued from the word which signifies no more then to per∣fect, establish, or make ready: The third is from the word which can signifie no other then to incline, to nod, slide, fall, or turne aside out of his place: All which can suffer no other paraphrase or Interpretation then this, That Almigh∣ty God hath set the Globe of the Earth so strongly fixed in her proper frame, that no power can bee so strong to dissolue this Fabricke, or turne her out of her appointed place: which expo∣sition of this place of Scripture, Copernicus himselfe would ea∣sily grant, as no way opposite to the triple motion hee la∣bours to establish▪ Here are these three arguments drawne from three words, suddenly shrunke into nothing. Another reason which I take to bee stronger then the former, some haue taken out of the 19 Psalme; where speaking of the Sunne, hee vses these words. In them hath hee set a Tabernacle for the Sunne. 5 Which is as a bridegroome comming out of his chamber▪ and re∣ioyceth as a giant to runne his course : 6 His going forth is from the end of the Heauens; and his circuite vnto the ends of it: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof. Out of which words the Heauens should seeme to challenge the motion, which wee haue giuen vnto the Earth. To this we answer two wayes: First, that although this may oppugne Copernicus his opinion, that the Sunne standeth still in the middest as the center of the World; yet may it well stand with our Assertion, who allow the Sunne his seuerall motion in the Eclipticke : whether those words of the Psalme bee to bee vnderstood of the Sunnes Diur∣nall or Periodicke Motion, is not so soone decided: the Scripture not specifying expressely either. 2 we may answer with the Co∣pernicâns ; That the Holy Ghost in these or the like places speakes : being willing to descend to the weakest of mens capacity, and not to trouble mens conceits with such matters as to vulgar iudgements might seeme vnlikely or improbable. The like Analogie of speech may wee finde in the first of Genesis, where the Moone is called one of the greater lights in regard of her appearance, being notwithstanding one of the least. These may suffice to shew the opinion of the earths circular motion to bee probable: I promised no more, & I hope I haue performed no lesse. I neuer held it an article of my faith, to defend the one, or oppugne the other; and therefore leaue e∣uery man to his owne free iudgement, to embrace or reiect what he please. CHAP. V. Of the Site, Stability, and Proportion of the Earth. 1 OF Terrestriall affections which agree in respect of the Earth it selfe, wee haue hitherto spoken: We are now to treate of such as agree to it in respect of the Hea∣uens. These are chiefly three; 1 The Site, 2 The Stability. 3 The Proportion. 2 The Site is the locall position of the Earth in respect of the Celestiall Bodyes. It might seeme a hard and almost impossible taske for any man to reconcile that which hath beene spoken in the former Chapter concerning the Earths circular Reuolution, with the grounds of common Geographers, which hold the Terrestriall Globe to bee setled and fixed in the Center of the world. The reason is; because such as hold the circular motion of the Earth, (whereof the chiefe is Copernicus ) would haue the Sun to stand still, as the fixt Center of the Vniuerse, and the Earth to moue round about him betwixt Mars and Venus, which seemes cleane opposite to the former opinion. I must confesse that Copernicus his opinion entirely taken and vnderstood, standeth altogether opposite to these our grounds: yet may that motion of the Earth which we haue established in the former Chapter (for ought I yet know) bee well reconciled with their opinion, which hold the Earth to bee the Center of the world. For the circular Re∣uolution wee gaue to the Terrestriall Globe, was not a motion of the Center of it, from one place to another, as that of the Starres which moue round about the Earth; but rather a turning of it selfe in its owne place, vpon her owne Poles and Axell-tree, in such sort as the wheele of a mill, or such a like engin fixt in one place is turned vpon his owne Axell: So that the motion wee there vnderstood was only the Diurnall motion of 24 houres, making the Day and Night. The other two motions mentioned by Copernicus, may be found out in the Heauens, and left to A∣stronomers. The reasons why I entirely embrace not Copernicus his opinion, are chiefely two. First, because it seemes too harsh and dissonant in nature, to make one and the selfe-same body subiect to so many motions, especially such as by common Phi∣losophers is denied all motion. Secondly, because the other mo∣tions granted to the Earth must needs suppose it to bee placed out of the Center of the world; the contrary of which we shall in this Chapter, God willing, sufficiently demonstrate. The mo∣tion therefore most called in question, and most likely to bee found in the Earth rather then in the Heauen, is the Diurnall Reuolution performed in 24 houres from the West to East: which (as we haue proued) being giuen to the Heauens would be farre swifter then nature can well suffer: wherefore with more probability may this motion bee taken from the heauens, and giuen vnto the Earth: The other without any absurdity at all may be granted in the Heauens: Sith no repugnancy is found in nature, but that euery heauenly body may be furnished with some motion: and therefore Copernicus might haue granted the Sun and fixed Starres their seuerall motions as well as the rest, which would haue seemed farre more probable then to haue en∣dowed the Earth with a Triplicity of motion. These things be∣ing thus opened, I will set downe their Theoremes. 1 The Terrestriall Globe is the Center of the whole world. To vnderstand aright this proposition, wee must consider that a Center may be taken two manner of wayes: either Geometri∣cally, or Optically : In Geometry it is taken for an imaginary point, conceiued in a magnitude deuoyde of all quantity, yet bounding and termining all Magnitudes: Optically it is vsually taken for a small and insensible Magnitude; because to the fight it may seeme no other then a Point ; In which last sense we may call the Earth the Center: For although the Earthly Spheare is en∣dowed with a great and massie substance, yet (as we shall here∣after demonstrate) in respect of the Firmament this greatnesse would vanish into nothing. For if a man standing in the Firma∣ment should behold it, it would seeme no other then as a small point. This being declared, wee will produce these reasons to proue the Earth to be the Center of the Vniuerse. The Center, I say, not of all heauenly motions (for some Starres are moued vp∣on their own Center) but of the whole heauenly machine being collectiuely taken as one Body The first argument is of Aristotle, taken from the grauity or naturall inclination of all heauy bo∣dies to the Center. The Earth (saith he) being a heauy & massie body, must needs seeke the lowest place, which is farthest off from the Heauens. But this can be no other then the Center or middest point of the whole world. Which argument by others is more subtily vrged in this manner. Suppose the whole masse of the Earth were cut and diuided into many parts, equall the one to the other, of the same waight and figure: which parts so diuided were placed in diuers places vnder the concaue Super∣ficies of the Moone, that they might be freely left to themselues to moue according to their naturall inclinations: It is most cer∣taine that all their parts being of the same nature, waight, quan∣tity, and figure, would descend with the same motion, & in the same equall time, to the same place; which could in no wise hap∣pen, except they should concurre in the Center of the world. But this reason, for ought I vnderstand, is only probable, and not backt with any necessary demonstration. For it proues not thing else but the Earth to bee the Center of all earthie and hea∣uy bodies, and not to bee absolutely placed in the exact middle of the world. Another reason not much vnlike the former, is drawne by some from a finall cause, and the naturall harmony of the parts of the world, one with the other: The Earth (say they) is of all other bodyes, the most vile, and sordid: There∣fore it is agreeable to nature, that it should be placed in the mid∣dle, equally distant from each part of the Heauens, that one part might not seeme to complaine of this vnpleasing vicinity more then another: But this reason takes as granted to matters, as yet not decided. First, that the Earth, amongst all other bo∣dyes, is most vile and sordid, depending on the ground of Peri∣pateticks, that the heauenly bodies suffer no corruption, a thing sooner spoken then proued. Secondly that pure and impure bodies, the most excellent and most vile in nature, are alwayes most distant, as in nature, so in place: which is a peremptory as∣sertion without ground. A third reason more probable then the former, is drawne from the apparences of Starres aboue the Horizon: It is manifest that the Starres aboue the Horizon appeare alwayes to bee of one, and the selfe-same magnitude, and quantity, whether in the verticall point, or in the East, or the West, or any other place: whence we may collect that they differ equally in distance from the Earth, and by consequence the Earth is seated in the middle of the world: for if it were otherwise, that the Starres in some place should bee neerer, in other farther of , they would some-where seeme greater, other∣where lesser, according to the grounds of the Opticks. This reason, howsoeuer popular, seemes to admit a two-fold ex∣ception. First, because it implies that a man standing on the su∣perficies of the Earth is equally distant from all places and parts of the Heauens, whereas the heauens in the Horizon are farther distant, by reason of a whole semidiameter of the earth inter∣posed. Secondly, all Starres arising in the East, or setting in the West, ordinarily seeme greater then in the Verticall point, by reason of vapours ascending and interposed. Whence wee can∣not well gather the Earth to bee seated in the middest from the like apparence of the Starres when experience teacheth the cō∣trary, that they seeme not alwayes of the like magnitude. Con∣cerning the first, we answer that the Semidiameter of the earth interposed betwixt the Superficies and Center, is in it selfe greater. But this (as wee shall proue) in respect of the Heauens is so little, that the sense cannot gather any difference in obser∣uation of the Starres, but that they should alwayes appeare of the like magnitude. Concerning the second, wee must needs ac∣knowledge that vapours ascending about the Horizon by an Opticall Refraction, make the Starres seeme greater then other wise they would doe. But the reason may bee vnderstood in this sort: that whether a an be placed in the same Horizon where the Sunne is when hee riseth, or vnder that Horizon where the Sunne is now, vnder his Meridian, or vnder that horizon where hee is setting, hee will appeare to bee of one and the selfe-same greatnesse without any sensible difference. Whereas therefore they speake of the appearance of Starres, they would haue them taken as abstracted from all impediments of sight or interposed vapours, and so the reason may obtaine her force. The fourth reason why the earth should bee seated in the midst, alleaged by Ptolomie, and others, is this: wheresoeuer any man stands on the Surface of the Earth, six signes of the Zodiacke will shew themselues, and the other six signes will lye hid; and by conse∣quence halfe the heauens will appeare, the other halfe will bee vnder; which is an euident reason that the Earth is in the midst, for otherwise it could not so happen. The former is confirmed by Ptolomie, Alphraganus, and the best Astronomers: the conse∣quence may bee inferred out of naturall reason. This argument will sufficiently hold vpon this supposition mentioned before, and to bee proued hereafter: That the Earth hauing no sensible magnitude in respect of the Firmament, no sensible difference can shew it selfe betwixt the Sensible, and the Rationall Hori∣zon. Besides these reasons, which make the matter more then probable: others are produced by Ptolomie demonstratiue, ot admitting any euident or probable exception or euasion. The first is this; If the Earth bee placed out of the Center of the world, it must haue of necessity one of these three Sites or positions: Either it must be in the plaine of the Equinoctiall: or at least it must bee placed, not onely without the plaine of the Equinoctiall, but without the Axell-tree: That is, to expresse it plainer; It must either bee placed beside the Axell-tree, yet e∣qually distant from both the Poles; or else it must bee on the Axell-tree, and so consequently neerer to one Pole then the o∣ther: or thirdly, it must needs be beside the Axell-tree, yet nee∣rer to one Pole then another. If the first position were admit∣ted, these absurdities would of necessity follow. First, that in a right Spheare there would happen no Equinoctiall, but onely in that Horizon which passeth by the Center of the world: for example sake; et there be imagined a Spheare, BDCE, whose Center is A: let the Equa∣tor bee DE: the Axel-tree of the world BC: and let the Earth bee in F, the right Horizon HG not passing by the Center of the world A: which shall bee parallell to the Axis BC: since the Equator cuts the Horizon in right angles; It is most manifest that not only the equa∣tour, but other parallells of the same will bee vnequally di∣uided of the Horizon: for as much as it passeth not by the Cen∣ter or the Poles of the world: wherefore it must needs follow, that the dayes must continually be vnequall to the nights: which contradicts all experience; because in a right Spheare the dayes are alwayes found to bee equall to the nights. Secondly, out of this position it would follow, that no man in a right Spheare should behold the halfe or hemispheare of the heauens, but ei∣ther a greater or lesser part, as may be demonstrated out of the same Diagramme, whereas sense can testifie that six signes of the Zodiacke are alwayes conspicuous aboue our Horizon, and the other six alwayes hid: only excepting that Hor zon which passeth by the Center of the Earth, wherein the Mediety of Heauen is conspicuous. Thirdly, the same Starres in a cleere aire should not alwaies seeme of the same magnitude; for if the earth be placed in the Equinoctiall plaine, and beside the Axis of the world toward the Zenith or Meridian; the Starres which are in the Meridian will appeare greater then in the East or West, because they are neerer. But if it bee placed neere the Nadir or midnight point, they will appeare greater in the East or West, then in the Meridian: if it should bee placed towards the East or West, the Starres would either seeme greater in the East then in the West, or contrarywise, greater in the West then the East: all which plainely contradicts experience. Moreouer it would hence follow out of this last, that the fore-noone would not be equall to the after-noone, for as much as the Meridian circle passeth by our verticall point, which in this case cannot bee in the middle of the hemispheare, but will decline more, either to the East or the West. Fourthly, it must needs follow that in an oblique Spheare, either there will bee no Equinoctiall at all, or at least, if there were any, it would not be in the midst betwixt the two Solstices of Summer and Winter; which is against all common experience. To explaine which assertion, let there be a Spheare ABCD, whose Center shall bee E: wherein wee will conceiue the equatour to be BD: the two Tropicks IL, and XH: the Axell-tree of the world AC: Now if the Earth should be placed in the plaine of the equatour, out of the Axis of the world, as in F let there first be an oblique Horizon ZFY, cut∣ting all the parallells into vnequall parts, and the Axis in those parallells which are without: it is manifest that in the said Ho∣rizon there will bee no Equinoctiall; because the Horizon e∣qually diuides in two halfes only that parallell which is descri∣bed by P, which neuerthelesse the Sunne neuer comes vnto, as neuer going beyond the Tropicke XH: Let there bee another oblique Hori∣zon OFM cut∣ting the Axell AC within the said paral∣lels in N: It is manifest by reason, that there will hap¦pen an equi∣noctiall in the said Horizon when the Sun shall describe the parallell by N: because this parallell is by the Horizon diuided into two equall partes. But this can in no wise happen in a middle space and time betwixt the two Solstices, for as much as the Equator only is equally distant and remoued from either Solstice. It is also manifest▪ that the Sunne residing in BD the equator, there can bee no equi∣noctiall, but either after or before: which is absurd and oppo∣site to obseruation. Fiftly, it will bee inferred out of these grounds, that no Horizon shall diuide the Heauens into two equall parts besides that which concurres with the equino∣ctiall circle, as BD, and such as are drawne by BD. Wherefore all people should not behold the one halfe of the heauens. Sixt∣ly, out of this opinion would necessarily bee concluded, that the excesse of the greatest and longest day aboue the equinoctiall day, should not bee equalized by the defect of the shortest day, by how much it is exceeded by the equinoctiall day: which is against all common experience; the consequence shall appeare by demonstration. Suppose A to be the Articke Pole: then will PG bee the excesse of the longest day XP aboue XG the E∣quinoctiall day. But KQ is the defect wherein the shortest day IQ, is exceeded of the Equinoctiall day IK. All these absurdi∣ties are auoided, if wee put the Earth in the Center E. for so in euery oblique Horizon, as in SR, will bee an Equinoctiall, the Sunne risiding in the Aequator. 2 The Heauens will bee diuided into two equall halfes, and PG the excesse of the longest day, will bee equall to KV, the defect of the shortest day: whence wee may conclude the first part of this argument, that the Earth is not besides the Axis in the plaine of the Equinoctiall. Concer∣ning the second position: if wee should place the earth in the Axis of the world out of the plaine of the Equinoctiall, as many, or more absurdities would of necessitie follow: for example sake, let it be imagined in P: First then no Horizon beside a right would cut the Heauen into two equall parts or halfes, and con∣sequently the Zodiack. But this is proued false by experience (as we haue shewed) because six signes of the Zodiacke are alwayes aboue and conspicuous, and the other six vnder. Secondly onely vnder a right Horizon would there bee an Equinoctiall, because only such an Horizon equally diuides the Equatour into two halfes, as may bee seene in the former figure, in which the Equa∣tour is conceaued to bee BD: the right Horizon AC. the ob∣lique YZ, cutting the Equator in F into two vnequall parts: Now if it should happen that in any oblique Horizon, there should bee an equinoxe, it could no wise bee in the middle time betwixt the two Solstices, but would be much neerer to the one then to the other; as if the Earth w re placed in N, betwixt the Tropicke XH, and the Equatour BD, there would bee an equi∣noxe when the Sunne passeth in the parallell by N. which pa∣rallell is farre neerer to the Summer Solstice, then the Winter Solstice. But if the Earth were in G, there would happen an e∣quinoxe iust in the day of the Summer Solstice; all which are most absurd, and most repugnant to common sense. Thirdly, this granted, the whole order and proportion of increase and de∣crease of dayes and nights, would bee confused and troubled. It is agreed on by consent of all Cosmographers, that euery where without the right Horizon, there is such an order and proporti∣on of the increase & decrease of the dayes and nights, that twice in a yeere the dayes are equall to the nights▪ to wit, in the meane, or middle betwixt the longest and the shortest day, that the lon∣gest day is equall to the longest night, and the shortest day to the shortest night. That the excesse of the longest day aboue the Equinoctiall day, is so much as is the defect of the shortest day in regard of the said Equinoctiall day. All which and many more such Apparences would bee interrupted, were the Earth placed any where else then in the Center E; as will appeare by the Scheme. For the Earth being placed in E, euery oblique Ho∣rizon, as SR, will diuide the Equatour BD, into two equall he∣micircles, so that so much shall appeare aboue as lies couched vnder, and so that day will bee equall to the night. In like sort the Tropicks HX and IL will bee diuided into two vnequall parts, yet so as the Alternate segments shall bee equall, to wit, PX and VL, also TH and VI, as it is demonstrated by Theodo∣sius, lib. 2. prop. 16. Whence it comes to passe that the longest day XP is equall to the longest night LV, and the shortest day IV is equall to the shortest night HP. Finally, PG, the excesse of the longest day XP aboue the Equinoctiall day XG, is equall to KV the defect of the shortest day vnder the Equinoctiall day IK, which is shewed out of the similitude and equality of the Triangles TEG, and VEK. Now of the contrary parts, if the Earth should be placed in the Axis without the Center E, as in P, beyond all the parallells, no equinoxe can bee in an oblique Spheare (as wee haue shewed) but alwayes the dayes will bee longer or shorter then the nights. But if the earth bee placed in the point G, by which passeth the last of the parallells, there will be one only equinoxe, & that in the Solstice in an oblique spheare in all other parts of the yeere the dayes would either be longer, or else shorter then the nights. But if the Globe of the Earth bee seated within the parallells in the point N, there would be two Equinoxes in a yeere, wherein the spaces of dayes and nights should increase and decrease. Neuerthelesse these increments & decrements should neither in number nor in greatnesse be equal to the increments and decrements of the nights, as may be ga∣thered very easily by sense, comparing the two Triangles, DNG, and QNK, because that more and greater segments of parallels are comprehended in the Triangle LNK, then in the Triangle PNG. Fourthly, if the Earth should vnequally respect the Poles, and were not placed in the Center, the shadowes of Gno∣mons erected which make right angles with the Horizon, should not bee cast directly forward in one right line in the time of the Equinoxes: the Sunne exactly placed in the East or West: as for example: let the earth be A, seated in the plaine of the E∣quinoctiall circle BC and let there bee a Gnomon erected on the plaine of the Ho∣rizon, which is repre∣sented by the circle BC: It is manifest to sense that the sun set∣ting in C, the shad∣dowes will be cast in the opposite part to∣wards B. Likewise the Sunne rising in B will cast his shadow towards C. But AC and AB, concurre in one right line, which plainely demonstrats vnto vs, that the earth is seated in the plaine of the Equinoctiall. But if it were placed out of it towards either side, as in E, if a Gnomon be set vp on the Horizon as EF, wee shall see that the Sunne rising in B in the time of the Equinoctiall, the shaddow will bee directed by the line EG, likewise the Sun setting in C, the shaddow will make the right line EH: But these two right lines being produced, will cut one the other in the point E, and therefore cannot concurre in the same right line, whereof ordi∣nary experience witnesseth the contrary. Fifthly, if the Earth were thus placed, it would follow by necessary consequence, that two signes of the Zodiacke diametrally opposite, should not be seene by a Dioptricke instrument: which is against experience which witnesseth that the rising and setting of the Sunne, may be seene by one right line: also the rising in the Summer Solstice and the setting in the Winter Solstice, to answer to each other in one right line in euery Horizon: which could not bee perfor∣med vnlesse the Earth were in the Equinoctiall plaine and the Center. Let there bee a Horizon BDCE, the E∣quator BC, the Axel-tree of the world DE, the Tro∣picke of Cancer FG, of Capricorne HI. Let the Earth first bee placed in the Center A: here may plainely bee perceaued that the Equinoctiall East B, and the Equinoctiall West C, answer and con∣curre in the right line BC: also that the East point of the Summer Solstice F, and the West of the Winter Solstice I, to concurre in the same right line FI▪ also the Winter East point H, and the Summer Westerne point G, to answer mutually one to the other by the same line GH. Which Apparence is confirmed of all Astronomers. Now let the Earth be set in the Axis out of the Equatour in K: It is ma∣nifest to sense that the contrary will alwayes happen: For the Winter point of the Sunne setting I, by a right line drawn from the Earth will not directly answer to the Summer point of ri∣sing F, but to the point L. Likewise the Winter point of Sunne∣setting G, will answer to the point M, and not to the Winter rising H. Whence wee haue sufficiently demonstrated this se∣cond position of the Earth beside the Center of the World to be inconuenient, and no wayes to bee defended. For the third po∣sition that the earth should be so remoued out of the Center, as that it should neither be in the Equinoctiall plaine, nor yet in the Axell-tree. Wee need produce no other confutation, then what wee haue said before of the other two positions. Because out of this, the same or greater absurdities would follow, then of the other, as any man may easily vnderstand out of these demonstra∣tions wee haue before recited. The second demonstratiue rea∣son, wherewith Ptolomy would confirme the Earth to be in the Center is drawne from the Ecclipse of the Moone in this man∣ner. If the Earth were not in the Center of the World, there would not alwayes happen Eclipses of the Moone, when the two greater lights are diametrally opposed, but sometime they would happen when these great lights are not residing in oppo∣site places of the Zodiack; which is false, and against experience; for all Astronomers haue witnessed, that eclipses of the Moone then only are seene, when the Sunne & the Moone stand direct∣ly opposite the one to the other: because then is the earth direct∣ly interposed. Now let the Center of the world be A, in which if the Earth bee placed, it is manifest that it then happens when the Sunne and the Moone are exactly opposed, and the earth in∣terposed directly, which in this case cannot otherwise happen: But if the Earth bee placed beside the Center of the world, as in B. These things may fall out, that the two Luminaries may re∣side in two opposite points of the Zodiack, and yet cause no e∣clipse; because the Earth is not in the same Diameter by the which they e opposed. Also the Moone will sometimes suffer an Eclipse, when shee is lesse distant from the Sunne then a semi∣circle. In a word, this eclypse is in places opposite. A semicircle will then only be seene when the Diameter of opposition shall passe by the Center of the Earth, and the world; all which are manifestly repugnant to experience and obseruation. Out of this demonstration of Ptolomy, Clauius, a later Astronomer in this sort drawes the like conclusion. Let there be obserued two diuers eclip∣ses of the Moon in di∣uerse places of the Zo∣diack: Now because each Eclipse ha∣pened when the Sun and the Moone were oppo∣sed the one to the other, in one Dia∣meter (as Experience & Astrono∣micall sup∣putations warrant) it must necessarily bee concluded that the earth should bee in each of those Diameters, and so by conse∣quence in the common section of them both: Sith then all the Diameters of the world concurre, and cut one the other in the Center: it must needs follow that the Earth should bee in the Center and midst of the World. Diuerse reasons there may bee drawne to proue this assertion. But these demonstrations of Pto∣lomy, as I haue set them downe enlarged, and explained by our later writers, may seeme sufficient, especially in a matter of few called in question. 2 The Position of the Earth in the Center of the World may be reconciled as well with the Diurnall motion of the Earth forementioned, as the Appa∣rences of the Heauens. That this proposition may the better bee vnderstood, wee are first to set downe in a Scheme, or Diagram, both the number and order of all the heauenly Orbs, conceiued according to our grounds. Secondly, we must shew in particular, how this ran∣ging of the heauenly bodies is capable of all the motions, and apt to satisfy the apparences. In which parts I wil not too nicely descend to Astronomicall curiosities, being too many and subtile for a Geographer to discusse. Only I will giue a tast, to satisfie such as suppose no middle way can bee troden out betwixt Pto∣lomies stability of the Earth, and Copernicus his three Moti∣ons. I might seeme perhaps presumptuous beyond my know∣ledge, to reiect and passe by the draughts and delineations of Pto∣lomy, Alphonsus, and their followers, which are commonly de∣fended and in vse: or that other of Copernicus, supported with the authority and credit of so great an Astronomer: or that of Tichobrahe more corrected then either, and to preferre my own, being an Embrion, or halfe fashioned. To this I answer. First, that I only expose this Scheme following to the view of the iu∣dicious, iustifying it no farther then will stand with Astronomi∣call obseruation. Secondly, I herein arrogate little or nothing to my selfe; for as much as I haue digested, and compounded it out of the obseruations and experiments of late Astronomers, and only collected together what they scattered; The Scheme it selfe is expressed in this manner; wherein to beginne from the lowest: The Center is the Globe of the Earth, to which wee haue giuen a Diurnall motion from the West to the East vpon her owne Poles, whose Reuolution is made in 24 houres: About the Earth as the Center of the whole world, the Moone is car∣ried in her circle, which amongst all the Planets, is found more neerely to respect the Earth, as well in place as nature. Next succeeds the Sunne, as the leader of all the Planets, which car∣ried round a∣bout the earth in an Annuall circuit, des∣cribes the E∣cliptick circle: about the Sun as the proper Center, are all the Planets moued except the Moon. The two immedi∣ate cōpanions of the Sun are Venus, & Mer∣curie, which so cōpasse him about, that the Earth neuer comes betwixt them and the Sunne. The other three Planets, as Mars, Iupiter, and Saturne, howsoeuer they enuiron the Sunne as their proper Center, yet so as within their circles, they comprehend the body of the Earth: The Planet Mars, because hee is found by Astrono∣mers, to moue sometimes aboue, sometimes vnder the Sunne, is vnderstood to moue in such a circle, which on the opposite side shall cut the circle of the Sunne: yet so as Mars and the Sunne can neuer meet in one point: Forasmuch as Mars, as well as the other Planets, is supposed to be carryed in an Epicycle about the Sunne, and to keepe an equall distance from him howsoeuer moued: Neither is he euer found vnder the Sunne, but about the time of the opposition, as Astronomers obserue: whence a cause hath beene giuen, why Mars should appeare greatest at the time of Opposition. These fiue Planets, to wit, Saturne, Iupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, may bee considered according to a double motion: The one is proper and naturall, wherein they are moued about the Sunne, as their proper Center: The other Accidentall, and as it were by a consequence of Nature, where∣by in their circuit mouing about the Sunne as their Center, they must of necessity, by a consequent site of the place, be carryed a∣bout the Earth. For the Sunne placed in his Eclipticke line, so compasseth round the Earth, that with him hee is supposed to carry the Epicy les, wherein these Planets are moued round a-about him. Whence wee finde the motion of these Planets about the Sunne, as their owne Center, to bee regular, but about the Earth irregular: which proceeds from their Excentricity in res∣pect of the Earth. Aboue all the Planets wee place the Firma∣ment, or Starry Heauen, hauing a very slow motion, not to bee finished in many thousand yeeres, and this motion is on other Poles then the Poles of the world, to bee sought out in or neere the Poles of the Eclipticke. This Heauen would Aristotle haue to bee the first moueable, and therefore gaue it a very swift motion, which is the same which wee call Diurnall, and haue gi∣uen to the Earth. But it seemes more consonant to nature, that the slower motions should agree to the higher bodies: and the swifter to the lower, that there might be a proportion, betwixt the time and the space of motion: It remaines that wee proba∣bly shew that out of their suppositions, the Celestiall Appa∣rences may bee as well or better salued then by the ordinary grounds. The Apparences which are most called in question, concerne either the Motion, or the Places, and Positions. All the rest are either of lesse moment, or at least are thereunto redu∣ced. Euery motion which is found or thought to bee found in the Heauens, is either the Diurnall, or Periodicke. The Diurnall Motion (as wee haue already shewed) belongs to the Earth, which according to our grounds is supposed to moue from the West vnto the East in 24 houres, Which may answer to the Motion of the first moueable Spheare; which according to Aristotle, is the Starry Firmament, and thought to moue from the East to the West. The Periodicke Motion, is either a slower Motion, to be finished not vnder many thousand yeeres, or else a swifter Reuolution of the Planets. This slow motion the com∣mon Astronomers would haue towfold: The one from the West to the East on the Poles of the Eclipticke : the other a Motion (as they call it) of Trepidation, from the South point to the North and backward againe: but one slow Motion of the sixt Starres vpon the Poles of the Eclipticke, granted to the Firmament, will (for ought I see) satisfy both. The reason why they put two distinct Motions, is, 1▪ Because they haue obserued the Starres of Aries, Taurus, and the rest of the Zodiacke, not to be seated in the same place wherein they were anciently found; but to be moued certaine degrees from the West towards the East. Whence they would conclude a Motion to bee from the West vnto the East. 2. It will stand with no lesse experience, that the foresaid Starres of the Firmament haue moued themselues from the South towards the North. To passe ouer the r st, the Pole∣star, which in Hipparchus time was distant from the Pole about 12 Degrees, is now obserued to approach almost three degrees. These two Motions, should they bee esteemed in the account of Astronomers might seeme deficient. Notwithstanding wee may probably coniecture this to bee no other then one, and the selfe∣same Motion vpon the Poles of the Eclipticke: Whence it may come to passe, that the fixt Starres are not only carryed from West to East, but also by reason of the obliquity of the Eclip∣ticke line, encline more and more dayly to the Pole of the World whence they may againe returne. For this motion from the West to the East, is of the primary intent of nature, wherein the Starres moue in circles parallell to the Eclipticke : But from the North to the South, as by the necessary consequence of the po∣sition and obliquity of the Zodiacke: because it cannot bee auoi∣ded, but that it should either incline to, or decline from the Pole. If they should obiect (as many doe) that this progresse is not proportionall in respect of the time according to the calculati∣on of the Astronomers. Wee answer. 1. That this difference is so small, that it should rather seeme to bee imputed to the ne∣gligence or ignorance of such as tooke these obseruations, then to any diuersity of motion. For who knowes not in these dayes of ours, wherein this art is arriued at a farre greater perfection, di∣uerse Astronomers in obseruing the same Star at the same time, to differ much the one from the other: Whose knowledge not∣withstanding, is fortified with the experience of the Ancients, and inuention of new Instruments. What then shall wee thinke of those, which distant so many ages in time, and vsing diuerse & vnlike Instruments in their obseruations, haue differed in mat∣ters of so small moment: chiefly in seeking out the period of this long and slow motion, which by reason of his slownes, since the time it was known to man, hath not ranne the fifteenth part of his circle. For my part, I shall rather ascribe it to the errour of their obseruations, then multiply Orbs without a greater cause. First, because (as wee haue said) the difference is so small, and almost insensible 2. Because wee haue beene taught by our Astronomicall histories, what kinde of Instruments were then in vse, which to later Astronomers haue beene thought too rude and vnfit to make such subtile obseruations. Lastly, concerning the Site and Position, no lesse reason may bee giuen out of our Hypothesis, then the common way. For by placing the fiue Pla∣nets to runne in their Epicycles about the Sunne, may we giue a reason of the inequality of their distance from the Earth, where∣in an ingenious minde in our common grounds can hardly giue himselfe sufficient satisfaction. 3 The stability is an affection whereby the Ter∣restriall Spheare is firmely setled in his pro∣per place. The Stability, or firmenesse of the Earth which we here vn∣derstand, 1. No way denyes or contradicts the motion of the parts of the Earth, whereby being separated, they returne to their proper place. 2. Neither the circular Reuolution of it on her owne Poles and Axell, whereof wee haue formerly spoken. But either such a motion whereby the parts of it may bee seue∣red one from the other, and so the whole Masse dissolued; or whereby the Center of the Earth may be moued out of his pro∣per place; or at least such as might mooue the Poles of the earth from their true verticity, whereby they should not respect al∣wayes in the Heauens the same points or poles. Which kinde of stability from motion we will establish in this Theoreme. 1 The Earth is firmely seated and setled in her pro∣per place. This Theoreme may bee proued as well by reason, as authority of holy Scripture: From reason it is demonstrated in this manner. If the Earth should not be setled in her proper place, this would of necessity happen; either by dissolution and separation of the parts one from the other: or by remouing the poles out of their fixt places: or else by motion of the Center from one place to the other. The first cannot be admitted; because (as we haue be∣fore taught in the second Chapter of this booke) All Terrestriall Bodies are endowed with an inclination or ponderosity to ap∣proach as neere as they can to the center of the Earth; so that by this coherency and conformity, the whole earth is ransom'd from any such mutability. Neither can the whole Spheare bee dissolued without an especiall miracle: And if so it should hap∣pen, the parts would returne againe, and conforme themselues to compose the same Spheare. Likewise the second way; The earth cannot loose her stability, because (as wee haue shewne in our former Chapter) the earth hath her two Poles magneticall made fast vnto the Poles of the world, as if they were bound firmely to two great pillers, neuer to bee shaken. Finally, The Center of the Earth cannot be moued out of his place any wise, because, as we haue demonstrated in the Chapter before, with∣out the disturbance and inuersion of the whole frame of Nature the Earth can haue no other place then the Center or middest of the whole world. Some haue alleaged as an argument that prin∣ciple of Aristotle: That one simple Body can haue but one simple Motion: and therefore the earth challenging to it selfe a right motion to the Center, cannot also haue a circular or round mo∣tion, and so of necessity must rest vnmoued in her proper place. But this reason, as I haue shewed, is weake to proue this asserti∣on. First, because this principle of Aristotle is not grounded on certainty, but contradicts experience, as I haue elsewhere shew∣ed. 2. This right motion to the Center is not to bee ascribed to the whole, as the immediate subiect, but to the parts of it sepa∣rated from the whole; so that nothing will hinder, but that the whole Globe may haue a motion proper to it selfe on his owne Poles. But to let this reason passe as weake; all those argu∣ments alleaged by the common Astronomers, and Philosophers against the circular motion of the Earth proue indeed no other matter then this stability which we establish: but if racked any farther come short to satisfie. For authority of Scripture, many places are vrged to proue this stability; whereof wee haue a pregnant place in 104 Psalme, wherein Dauid magnifying the Creator, saith That hee laid the foundation of the Earth so sure, that it should not be moued at any time: To which may be added many other Texts, but that I hold this one sufficient in a matter which few men call in question. Wee are in the third place to treate of the proportion of the Earth, with the heauenly bodies. 4 The Proportion is that wherein the quantity of the Terrestriall Globe is compared with the quantity of the Heauens. We must here remember a distinction before touched, that the Globe of the Earth may bee considered two wayes; either Abso∣lutely in it selfe, or Comparatiuely in respect of the heauenly Bo∣dyes. If we consider it absolutely in it selfe, wee shall finde that the Earth hath a vast and huge magnitude, and not any wayes to bee compared to a point; because it is a body, and therefore subiect to diuision, whereas a point is conceaued as an indiui∣sible signeadmitting no parts at all. S condly, because the mag∣nitude of the Earth many times taken, will measure the great∣nesse of the Heauens, as wee may obserue by Astronomers who measure the magnitude of the greatest Stars by Diameters and Semidiameters of the Earth: whereas a point of it being a thousand times multiplied, will neuer beget a magnitude or measure of the quantity of any Body. Thirdly, the Starres are not as meere points in respect of their Orbs, because they sensi∣bly are seene, as parts of these Orbs. But the Earth is greater then some of the lower Starres, as the Moone : Whence we may with good grounds auerre, that if a man were placed in the Moone, hee might behold the Earth far greater then the Moone being obserued by vs in the Earth. Wherefore no man can de∣ny but the Earth in it selfe hath a great vastnesse. But if wee con∣sider this greatnesse in respect of the Heauens, we shall find this vast greatnesse to shrinke almost into nothing, and become as a meere point without sensible magnitude. But this is not altoge∣ther generall without limitation; because the heauenly bodies are distinguished into the higher and greater, such as are the Fir∣mament with the foure higher Planets, such as are Saturne, Iu∣piter, Mars, and the Sunne : or the lower and lesser, such as are Venus, Mercurius, and the Moone, which difference in place and greatnesse admits a great diuersity in this proportion, as wee shall shew in these two Theoremes. 1. The Earthly Globe compared in quantity with the Firmament and superiour Orbes of the pla∣nets, hath no sensible magnitude. This Proposition is supported not only by the authority of many and graue Authors, as Aristotle, Ptolomy, Pliny, Alphra∣gan, and others: but by diuers strong reasons drawne from ex∣perience and obseruation of Astronomers. The first argument shall be this which is most popular. The Sunne and many other Starres in the Firmament, are found out by Astronomicall In∣struments to bee manifold greater then the Globe of the Earth: yet appeare they in respect of the heauens but as a little point or portion. Then must the Earth, being in comparison far les∣ser, be deuoyd of all sensible magnitude or proportion. Second∣ly, if the Earth had any notable quantity in respect of the Hea∣uen, then must the Diameter of the earth haue as great a quan∣tity in respect of the Diameter of the Sky; for there is the same proportion of the Diameters which the circumferences haue one to the other, as is demonstrated in Geometry. Now if the Diameter of the Earth hath any notable magnitude in cōparison of the Diameter of the Skye, then the Starres which be ouer our heads, be neerer vnto vs by a notable quantity, then when they bee either in the East or West. For it must needs follow that the Starres placed in the verticall point, are neerer by the Semidia∣meter of the Earth, then when they are either in the Easterne or Westerne point, as we see in his figure here set downe ACDB, wherein I make E to be the Center of the Earth, AEB the true Horizon, and EF the Semidiameter of the earth. Now if the Semidiameter FE haue any sensible proportion, then must G the verticall point be neerer to F. then either A or B. sup∣posed to bee the East & west points; because EA, or EB, are the whole Semidiameter of the Celestiall cir∣cle, whereof FG is only a part. But contrarywise there is no such diuersi∣ty perceiued in the magnitude of the Starres, but that they appeare still to bee of one and the same greatnesse, except by accidentall interposition of vapours and grosse bodies: wherefore it must of necessity follow, that their distance is all one in all parts of the Skye, and by consequence the Semidiameter of the earth hath no sensible diuersity in di∣stance. Thirdly, hence would arise another reason no lesse for∣cible then this; that if the Semidiameter of the Earth had any comparison or proportion to the Semidiameter of the Skye, the Horizon that we haue on the vpper part of the earth, should not diuide the Skye into two equall parts; for as much as the part which is couched vnder the Horizon, would alwayes be greater, and the other lesser, as in our former Diagramme: if EF haue a notable quantity in compa ison of EA: then will the line CFD, being the Horizon on the top of the earth, differ notably from the line AEB, being the Diameter of the World, and the Horizon to the Center of the Earth: and so shall not the Horizon CFD, diuide the world into two equall parts, but the vpper part shall alwayes be lesser then the lower, which crosses ordinary experience: for we may see in long winter nights, that those Starres which are in the East Horizon, in the beginning of the night, will be in the West at the end of twelue houres: and contrarywise, those Stars which did set in the West, when those others did rise in the East, shall rise agayne when the other shall set. Fourthly if the earth had any sensible greatnesse in respect of the Heauens, then were it vnpossible for any Sunne Diall to bee regular and obserue due proportion. For we see the shaddowes to moue as duely and orderly about the Center of Dials and such instruments, as if their Center were the very Center of the world: which could neuer happen if these two Centers should differ notably in respect of the Spheare of the Sunne: to expresse it the better we will set this Figure, which represents the three notable circles in a Diall, which are described by the course of the Sunne in three notable places of the Zodiacke, to wit, the two Tropicks, and the Equinoctiall. Herein the vttermost arch BLC represents the Tro∣picke of Capricorne, and is described no greater then the quarter of a circle, be∣cause the Sun placed in the Signe, shines vnto vs but six houres. The Equinocti∣all is set as halfe a circle, because the Sun being in it, appeares vnto vs 12 houres, & is here noted out by EIF. The Tropicke of Cancer containes 3 quar∣ters of a Circle, because when the Sun is in it, there are eighteen houres from Sun-rising to Sun-set: and that circle is GHK. The Center of the Diall is A, and the Style which giues the shadow DA, whose top being D, doth describe those portions of circles with such exactnesse, as if the Diall were set in the very Center of the Earth, and the distinction of the houres shewes it selfe no otherwise then if the Center of the Diall were the same with the Center of the world. To these arguments I may adde, that if there should bee a sensible greatnesse of the earth in respect of these superiour Orbes, either all or most of these absurdities would arise which follow their opinions, who place the Earth out of the Cēter of the World, which we haue before treated of. 2 The Terrestriall Globe compared with the in∣feriour Orbs hath a sensible magnitude. Although the whole Earth compared with the Firmament and superiour Orbs of the Planets, seeme no otherwise then a point: yet from this wee must except the Orbes of the lower Planets Venus, Mercury, but especially the Moone: Who are found by obseruations of diuerse skilfull Astronomers to haue a sensible and notable greatnesse in respect of the earth, where∣of a manifest argument may bee drawne from the Parallax or variation of the sight: wherein our obseruations of the same Starre at diuerse places are not the same, though at the same time: neither will such a Starre to both places seeme in the same point of the Heauens; which could not possibly bee, except we admit a sensible difference betwixt the Rationall and Sensible Horizon ; and so grant the Earth, in respect of such Orbs, some quantity and greatnesse. This diuersity of Aspect, which they call the Parallax may be seene in this Figure: let A be the Cen∣ter of the Earth, L the Moone, or other Starre to bee obserued, EGD, the Firmament or Orbe of the fixt Starres: suppose then the eye to be in the fixt point M of the sensible Horizon XMY the said Planet will appeare in the point of the Firmament S, according to Opticall principles, whereby all things are sayd to be seene in the place directly opposite. Supposing againe the Eye to be in the point P of another sensible Horizon RPQ, the Starre L will no doubt appeare in the opposite point T. Nei∣ther of which meets with the Starre in the right place. For ima∣gining the Eye to bee placed in the Center A, the place of the Starre would bee V, which is his true place. These differences of sight could finde no place if the Earth were as a meere point and challenged no sensible Magnitude, in respect of these inferi∣our Planets: and yet experience of Astronomers hath sufficiently confirmed it. But this being a point very curious, and appertai∣ning to Astronomy, I leaue it to their farther industrie, whose profession it vndergoes. CHAP. VI. Of the Circles of the Terrestriall Spheare. 1 ALL the properties which agree by Nature to the Terrestriall Globe, we haue handled. Here wee are in the next place to treat of such, as agree by vertue of our vnderstanding: Of this sort are all the Circles conceaued to be in the Terrestriall Globe. 2 A Terrestriall Circle is a round line conceiued in the face of the Terrestriall Globe, diuiding it into two parts. A Circle is considered two manner of wayes: either abstra∣cted from this or that sensible matter, in which sort it is suppo∣sed to bee taught in Geometry ; to which properly appertaines the knowledge of the Fabricke and Measure of all Magnitudes, especially of this, being amongst all, the most perfect and exact: Or else a circle is considered so far forth as it hath some ground in the Nature of the Earth, at least by application of the Celesti∣all Globe, and so it comes into the consideration of Geography. For conclusions demonstrated and proued in Geometry, are here to be admitted as principles supposed not demonstrated a new: which Logicke, if Clauius, Blancanus, and other such writers had well learned, they would not haue stuffed out their worke with such Heterogeneall mixtures, but haue reduced euery thing to his proper seat and science. A circle as well by the Geogra∣pher as Astronomer is diuided into foure quadrants, each qua∣drant into 90 degrees, all which make vp 360. So that a degree is the 360 part of a Circle, which I only mention as being of chiefest vse with vs, yet supposed to bee handled and taught in a higher science. 1 A circle though imaginary in it selfe, hath his ground in the Nature of the Earthly Spheare. As in Logicke men haue inuented certaine Intentionall No∣tions, seruing as so many instruments to direct and regulate our vnderstanding in the apprehension of things: So in Cosmogra∣phie can there not be wanting such imaginary signes and circles to confirme and ayde our phantasie. And as in Logicke such No∣tions in themselues are meerely imaginary and intentionall, yet may be tearmed reall, so farre forth as they are grounded in the things themselues; so may we speake of these circles conceiued in the face of the Terrene Globe: which wee are not to con∣ceiue to bee fictious and imaginary, as if they had no ground at all in nature. For although there bee no such circles painted on the face of the Earth, as wee finde in an artificiall Spheare: yet must wee of necessity conceaue such reall respects to bee in the Earth it selfe: as when a Ship sayles ouer the Ocean, it can∣not bee said to leaue behind any visible marke or Character in the surface of the water; yet in regard it made a reall passage, it will leaue a line conceiuable, signing out vnto vs the true pas∣sage. It is a matter which hath not a little troubled Cosmogra∣phers, to finde out the immediate and true subiect or ground of these circles; whether they should be immediatly taken from the earth, or else in the Heauens. The ancient Cosmographers haue acknowledged no other ground of these Circles; then the congruity and application of the celestiall Globe, and his parts with the parts of the Earth: but our Magneticall Philosophers more neerely searching into the nature of the Earthly Spheare haue found these Circles all (except the Horizon) to wit, the Meridians, and Parallells, to bee immediatly grounded in the Earth it selfe: whose opinion we cannot reiect, as being suppor∣ted by experimentall demonstration, as wee shall shew in par∣ticular. 2 The distinction of a circle into any certaine Number of parts, hath no certaine ground in the Nature of the earthly Spheare, but only inconueniency; leauing our iudgements free, to take such a Number as may best serue our purpose. Some Astronomers more curious then wise, haue gone about to seeke a ground of this distinction of a circle into 360 parts out of the Sunnes course in the Zodiacke, a Circle (say they) by the opening of the Compasse, being described in a plaine, is di∣uided into six equall parts. Now because the Sunne being the rule and measure of all perfect motions, passeth through one sixt part in 60 dayes, the whole Circle was diuided into 360, for 60 multiplied by 6, will produce that number. But this reason seemes to infer nothing concerning any naturall ground, that this distinction shall finde in the Earth, though it may serue as an argument of Conueniency, the number 360 being fittest for that calculation. Another reason very like the former, is drawne from the coniunction of the Sunne with the Moone, which happens 12 times in a yeere: and because from each con∣iunction to that which followeth are spent 30 dayes; Hence it is that the Zodiacke is first diuided into 12 parts, which multi∣plied by 30 will produce 360. This reason likewise proues only thus much, that it is the fittest number to calculate the Motion of the Sun in his Eclipticke: Not that this diuision hath any ground in Nature more then other▪ because being a continuate quanti∣ty, according to Philosophy, it may suffer infinite diuisions: for it was in the beginning left free to Cosmographers, to choose what number they pleased to expresse the parts or sections of a Circle: which they tooke (as it seemeth) not meerely from the motion of the Sunne, but from their conueniency, and commo∣dity, finding this number most commodious for the distinction of euery Circle. The reason was, because no number could bee found, which suffered more parts and diuisions then this. For as much as in 60, whereof 360 by multiplication is produced, hath exactly these parts 1.2.3.4.5.6.10.12.15.20.30. Likewise 360 hath exactly 1.2.3.4.5.6.8.9.10.12.15.18.20.24.30.36.40.46.60.72.90.120.180. Of all which parts there is so great vse in Astronomy and many times in Geography, that without it there would be small exactnesse. For as we see a yard measure would little steed the Mercer or Clothier, except it were againe diuided into smaller parts: so fals it out in the ac∣count of the Cosmographer. 3▪ Of the Terrestriall Circles, some are Absolute, some Relatiue : the Absolute are such as are assigned without any respect to our sight; of which sort are the Meridians and Parallells. 4. The Meridian is a circle drawne by the Poles of the world and the verticall point of the place. The Meridian Circle is so called of Astronomers ; because when the Sun (according to their suppositions) by the motion of the first moueable comes into this Circle, it makes mid-day: and then hath been running his course from his rising to arriue there iust so long as he shall be mouing from thence to the place of his set∣ting. In this Meridian are placed the two Poles of the Equator, which are the same with the Poles of the world; in this also are the verticall point and the point opposite vnto it, tearmed the Poles of the Horizon, whereof we shall speake hereafter. So that so many Meridians are imagined to be in the Earth, as there are vertical points: for howsoeuer we see not many Meridians pain∣ted on the face of the artificiall Globe, yet must there be so many imagined in the reall Earth as Zenithes and Horizons: so that it is impossible for a man to moue neuer so little from East to West, without changing his Meridian: yet for more order sake haue the Cosmographers reduced the number of Meridians to halfe the number of the degrees in a Circle, to wit, to 180, that eue∣ry Meridian cutting the Equator, and other Parallels in two op∣posite places, should answer to two degrees in the same Circle. By which it appeares, that euery Meridian diuides the Terrene Globe in two halfes, whereof the one is respectiuely tearmed of the East, the other of the West. But to auoid all ambiguity of speech, we ought to consider that a Meridian is twofold; either the true Meridian, or Magneticall Meridian. The true Meridian, ordinarily so called, is that which directly passeth by the Poles of the World; of which wee here treat, which indeed (as wee shall shew) is the onely true magneticall Meridian. But that which some haue falsly called the Magneticall Meridian, is that which runneth by the Poles of the Magneticall Variation, and much differs from the true; because (as we haue taught) the va∣riation is diuerse according to the diuersity of place, & there∣fore cannot answer in any certaine proportion to the Poles of the Terrene Globe. The true Meridian Circle, as it hath mani∣fold vse in Astronomy, namely to distinguish mid-day, and mid∣night, to measure the rising and setting of the Starres, &c. mat∣ters not to bee neglected of Geographers; so hath it a more spe∣ciall vse in Geography: to designe the longitudes and latitudes of the places, with their distances, with many other matters trea∣ted of hereafter. 5▪ Concerning the Meridian circle wee are to know two things. The Inuention of it, and the Distinction: The inuention is whereby wee are taught to find out the true Meridian in any place assigned. 6▪ The Inuention of the Meridian is againe two∣fold: the one more Accurate, which is either Astronomicall or Magneticall, the other Po∣pular; the Astronomicall way is performed by obseruing the celestiall motion. The Meridian may bee found out the Astronomicall way in di∣uerse manners by Instruments deuised for this purpose by in∣genious Artificers, whereof some are described by Gemma Fri∣sius in his Cosmographie. But to auoid the cost of curious Instru∣ments, I will set downe our way, depending on this Theoreme. 1 If two seuerall Sunne-shadowes bee obserued, the one in the fore-noone, the other in the after∣noone of the same day exactly to touch with their ends, the Circumference of the same circle descri∣bed in a Plaine, Parallell to the plaine of the Horizon: The line from the Center equally diui∣ding the Arch of that Circle betwixt the two shad∣dowes, will bee the true Meridian circle for that place. This Theoreme, howsoeuer consisting of many parts, is not∣withstanding easie enough to bee vnderstood, being explayned by an ocular demonstration. Let there bee gotten a platforme of wood or metall, and placed euenly that it may lye parallell with the plaine of the Horizon: In this plaine let there bee des∣cribed diuerse circles from the same Center E. In this Center let there bee raysed a Gnomon EF to right angles, so that the top of this Gnomon F, shall euery where bee equally distant from the circumference of each circle described in the plaine, which may easily bee knowne, because if it bee equally distant from any three points of any circles Circumference, it will also bee equally distant from all the rest alike, as Clauius hath taught in the 4 of his Gnomonicks. This platforme being thus ordered let the shaddow of the Gnomon bee obserued sometimes be∣fore Noone, vntill such time as it exactly shall touch the circum∣ference of one of those circles, as in EG. Againe in the After∣noone, let the shaddow bee obserued, till with his end it meet the circumference of the same circle, as in EH, which will hap∣pen so many houres afternoone, as the other before Noone. These two points G and H, being diligently obserued, let the Arch of the Circle GH bee diuided into two halfes with a line drawne from the Center E, which shall bee ED. This line ED will bee the true Meridian for that place, on which when the shadow of the gnomon shall happen to fall, wee may assure our selues that it is full Noone. 7 The Magneticall Inuention is performed by the Magneticall Directory Needle. This way is subiect to much errour, and not so certaine as the former, because (as wee haue shewed before) there are found very few places which admit not some of Variation: yet because it may bee profitable to such, who haue not the Com∣mand alwayes of the Sunne, or sight of the Starres, I will in∣sert this Theoreme. 1 The Line wherein the Directory needle is di∣rected from North to South, is the Meridian for the place. This may bee shewed in any Marriners Compasse, or Sunne-Dyall, whose needle is magnetically touched. For b ing set euenly parallell to the playne of the Horizon, it will shew by the needle, the Miridian for that place in euery verticall point on the earth. For example in the Sea-Compasse in the next page, experience will witnesse in euery Region of the Earth, that the one point signed out by the Lilly, will alwayes turne to the North ; the other opposite part, will turne it selfe to the South; which two parts being ioyned together by a right Line will shew the Meridian fo at place: The Meridian (I say) not alwayes the true; for this Inuention taken from the Magnet is not so exact as the Astronomicall: for as much as few or no places are found, wherein the Magneticall Needle admits not a Variation from the true points of North and South: Neuerthelesse, this way is very necessary to bee knowne: for as much as the Sunne and Starres are not alwayes to bee seene; at least in such place and manner as may fauour exact∣nesse of obseruation: Hence may bee demonstrated in particu∣lars, what wee obserued before in generall in our Magneticall Treatise that the Circles of the Globe are not meere Imaginary Fictions, or bare Respects, growing out of the Application of Celestiall bodies (as some haue thought them) but grounded on the Magneticall Disposition of the Terrestriall Globe. 8 Beside the Astronomicall and Magneticall In∣uention of the Meridian, there is another way more popular, but lesse exact, which is without any obseruation of the Heauens, or the Magnets operation. Of the Inuention of the Meridian circle, the true and exact knowledge (as wee haue shewed) is endebted to heauenly ob∣seruation, or Magneticall experiment. Neuerthelesse Nature is not so barren, but she hath pointed out to an industrious obser∣uation, some markes and foote-steps in other inferiour bodies, for the finding out of this profitable circle. Which wayes, how∣soeuer of lesse Account then the other, and therefore of lesse vse, are notwithstanding pleasant to vnderstand: because nothing delights more an ingenious minde, then the contemplation of Gods working, in and by his creatures, which men vsually terme Nature. To make a particular search into all Planets, Stones, Met∣tals, and other such Bodies, were to goe too far out of my way, without a Guide. I will giue one only Instance of Trees, where∣of I will insert this Probleme. 1 By the Incision of a Tree, to find out the Meridian. To performe this Probleme, let there bee chosen out some Tree in an open free field, farre from walles or other obstacles; in such a place as it hath beene on either side freely en∣lightned and hea∣ted by the Sunne∣beames: let the Trunke of this Tree bee very right and sound: let this Trunke bee cut off by the middest, in such sort that the secti∣on be Parallell to the Horizon, and the vnder-part of the Trunke bee left to stand in his former Naturall situation: Now the Section on the top of it being well plained, will as in a plaine discouer diuers circles, which are Excentricke and not drawne from the same Center, but on the one side nee∣rer together; on the other further off: That part then which shewes the circles thicker and neerer together, points out the North: The other wherein the circles are wider and further off, the one from the other, designes out the South-point: betwixt both which if a right line bee drawne, it will bee the Meridian for that place. Which experiment Blan anus (as hee writes) tryed in a Plume-Tree, but giues no reason for it. The cause I take to be no other then the extension and diffusion of the sappe or moisture, by the heate of the Sunne: which is more on the South-side then the North-side: for as much as the Sunne in our clime respects vs on the South, neuer on the North. Hence is it, that the circles which are nothing else but the excrescences of the moisture, being more rarified on the South-side, and there∣fore requiring a greater place, are found to bee greater. 9 Hauing shewed the Inuention, wee are in the next place to treat of the Distinction of these Meridian circles: A Meridian therefore is termed either First or Common. The distinction of Meridians into First and Common, hath no foot-steps in Nature, but is a meere arbitrary Imposition of antient Cosmographers. For no reason besides Conueniency can be shewne, why one Meridian should be called First rather then another: yet cannot this Distinction bee wanting to a Geogra∣pher, for as much as some setled bound must be set, from which to begin our accompt of Longitudes. 10 The first Meridian is that from which wee begin to number the Longitude of the Earth, from West to the East. In respect of which all the rest may bee called common or lesse notable. The ancient Cosmographers, amongst whom Ptolomy was the chiefe, haue set the first Meridian in the Fortunate Ilands, from whence they began their accompt, passing Eastward through Europe and Africa, and so through Asia, to the vtter∣most parts of India, vntill they returned againe to the first Me∣ridian, passing through the Fortunate Ilands; Some haue doub∣ted whether these Ilands called by Ptolomy the Fortunate I∣lands, be the same with the Canaries ; because (as our Countrey∣man M r Hues hath obserued) the Latitude giuen by Ptolomy to the Fortunate Ilands, agrees not exactly to the Canaries ; but rather to the Ilands of Cape-Verde. Notwithstanding this obser∣uation, I rather sticke to the common opinion, thinking it no vnlike matter, that Ptolomy dwelling far Eastward, and trusting to other mens obseruations, should erre in this, as well as other matters. The reason why the first Meridian should bee placed here, rather then elsewhere, is thought by some to bee; because the Ancients supposed two Magneticall Poles in the Earth, which should bee the cause of the Variation of the Compasse. Now because in the Canary Ilands, was found no Variation at all, they thought it to bee the place where the Magneticall and the true Meridian should concurre, as wherein were both the Poles, of the World, and of the Load-stone: which made them to make it the first Meridian: But this reason I take to bee vnlikely; because as I finde it obserued by latter Writers, in the Canary Ilands themselues there is found a Variation of the Compasse, although very little: the reason whereof wee haue shewed to bee because it is the middest betwixt two great Con∣tinents, to wit, the one of Europe and Africa, the other of A∣merica. Whose magneticall temper being almost equall, will not suffer the magneticall Needle to moue more one way then another: Moreouer, I am certainely perswaded (as far as I can gather) that this placing of the First Meridian was appointed here before any certainty was knowne of the Variation of the Compasse. The more probable coniecture therefore is that Ptolomy here placed the First Meridian, because it was the vttermost verge of land toward the West, then discouered, neuer dreaming of a Westerne world afterward detected and brought to light by Christopher Calumbus and Americus Vesputius. Some of the latter Geographers striuing to bee more exact, haue placed the First Meridian in their Mappes out of the Canaries in the Ilands of the Azores called S. Michaels Iland. So that the first Meridian of Ptolomy dif∣fers from the place of these latter Cosmographers about 9 degrees: which is diligently to bee noted of such as beginne the Science; because this variety not perceiued, will breed great errour and confusion: yet is not the first of Ptolomy out of vse, but retained of many good Geographers. Euery other Meridian in respect of this, may be called Common, or lesse no∣table, because this is most remarkable: yet may the rest com∣pared amongst themselues be ranged in a certaine order, as the Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, and so along till we come againe to the First, being in all reduced to the number of 180, answe∣ring to 360 Degrees as wee haue taught. So much for the Me∣ridians. 11 The Parallels are equidistant Circles pas∣sing from the East to the West directly. I haue defined the Parallell Circles in a larger sense then for∣mer Geographers vsually haue taken it in: as willing vnder this generall name, not onely to include the Parallels common∣ly so called, but also the Equatour: because I see no reason why the Equatour being euery where equidistant from each o∣ther Circle, should not suffer this acception. The common sort of Cosmographers, vnder this name, would onely com∣prize the minor Circles, which are conceiued to bee equally distant and correspondent to the Equinoctiall Circle, so that all should bee so called in respect of the Equatour, to whom they are said to answer, not in site and position ; for as much as they decline from the middle of the Earth to the North and South: but in Comparison and Proportion ; for as the Equa∣tour is drawne from East to West, and diuides the whole Spheare of the Earth into the North and South Hemispheares: So the other also diuide the Globe of the Earth, though not into two equall parts as the Equatour, but vnequall. These Parallels many wayes are distingushed from the Meridians : first, because the Meridians are drawne directly from North to South: but the Parallels from East to West. Secondly, the Meri∣dians, how many soeuer they are imagined to bee, concurre and meete all in the Poles of the Earth: whereas the Parallels how∣soeuer drawne out at length, will neuer concurre or meete in a∣ny point. Whence it must needes follow that all Parallels and Meridians in the Globe must cut one the other, and make right angles. These Parallels although infinite in number, may bee in the Spheare reduced to the number of the Meridians, because they are drawne through the opposite points and degrees of the Meridian Semi-circle, which would make vp the number of 180: but yet for Conueniency they haue not painted so many in the face of the Artificiall Spheare; for as much as so many lines and circles might beget Confusion. Wherefore Ptolomy and the Ancients haue distinguished the Parallels on both sides the Equa∣tor, North and South, with such a Distance, that where the day should increase one quarter of an houre, a new Parallel should be placed. So that the longest day of one Parallell should surpasse the longest day of another, for one quarter of an houre. By which appeares that the Parallels are not of one greatnesse, but by how much neerer the Pole they are placed; so much lesse are they; and so much greater by how much farther off from the Poles, and neerest the Equatour. These Circles are of great vse in Geographie, as to distinguish the Zone: Climats, and Latitudes of Regions, to shew the Eleuation of the Pole, and to designe out the length and shortnesse of the day in any part of the Earth. 12 A Parallell Circle is of two sorts; either greater or lesser: The greater is the Equatour or equinoctiall Circle. 13 The Equatour is the greatest of the Pa∣rallels, passing through the middest of the Earth, and exactly diuiding them from the Poles into two equall halfes or Hemispheares whereof the one is North, the other South. This Circle is called the Equatour or Equinoctiall of Astrono∣mers; because, that when the Sunne passeth vnder it, as vpon the 11 of March, and the 13 of September, it makes the Day and Night equall. This Circle of Astronomers is esteemed the most notable, being the measure of the Diurnall and most regu∣lar Motions▪ The La ines haue taken the name and appellation of this Circle from the Day, as the Greeks from the Night: Wherein the Sense is no way varyed; because the equality of the Day argues the like equality of the Night. The two Poles of the Circle, are the same with the Poles of the Vniuersall Earth: to wit, the Articke or North-Pole, and the Antarticke and Sou∣therne Pole: whereof the former is alwayes conspicuous in our Horizon, the other lies couched and hidde from our Sight. It is called the Articke-pole from the Constellation of the little Beare in the Heauens, neere to the which it is situated: in opposition to the which the other is called Antarticke. It hath manifold vse in Astronomy, copiously by Astronomers: And no lesse in Geo∣graphy : for without this Equinoctiall Circle, no Description of the Earth can be absolute & perfect, neither any Citie or Place. in the Terrestriall Globe or Mappe set in his due and proper place. This Equinoctiall Circle in regard of the Earth, passeth through the middle-most part almost of Africa, by Ethiopia, A∣merica, and Taprobana: So that it exactly diuideth the Globe of the Earth into two halfes, the Northerne and Southerne Hemis∣pheares; so that these people which dwell vnder the Equatour are said to inhabite the middle of the world, because they in∣cline neither to the North, nor to the South: hauing so much distance from the Articke Antarticke-Pole of the Earth. More∣ouer, by this Circle (as wee will declare hereafter) are noted out vnto vs the East and West part of the Spheare, no way to be neglected of Geographers. 1 Concerning the Equatour, two things are to be obserued: either the Inuention, or the Site and Position: The Inuention is either Astronomicall or Magneticall. The Astrono∣micall according to these Rules. 1 The Meridian being found out, to find the E∣quator. This is easily performed by the helpe of the former Figure: for therein the Meridian line being found out (as we haue shewed) let there bee drawne by the Center E of that Circle, the line AC, making right Angles with the said Meridian : which line AC will bee the true Equatour, and will point out vnto vs the true East and West: as A the East and C the West. Whence it appeares that the two lines, to wit, of the Equa∣tour and the Meridian doe diuide and cut the whole Horizon in∣to two equall Quadrants. 2 Without the helpe of the Meridian to find out the Equatour. In the time of either Equinoctiall in some Horizontall plaine, in the Sunne-shine, let there bee erected a Gnomon: then in the day time, let there bee noted all the points by which the end or top of the shadow hath passed: for all those points in the time of Equinoctiall, are in a right line; be∣cause then the end of the shadow is carried in a line in the time of the Equinox in a Herizontall plaine: This line will bee the true Equinoctiall -line: the cause is giuen by Clauius in Gnomoni∣cis. lib. 1. prop. 1. Corollar. 2. which depending on many Geo∣metricall and Astronomicall principles, as too far from my pur∣pose, I omit. 15 The Magneticall inuention of the E∣quatour, is wrought by the Magneticall Inclinatory Needle, according to this Pro∣position. 1 Wheresoeuer at any place of the Terrestriall Spheare, the Inclinatory Needle shall conforme it selfe in a Parallell -wise, to the Axell of the Earth, through that place passeth the Equinocti∣all Line. As to finde out the Meridian of any place, wee are to vse the helpe of the Directory Needle: so to the finding out of the Equatour, and Parallels, the Inclinatory Needle is most neces∣sary: because the former respects the Magneticall Motion of Direction, the latter of Declination: Now wheresoeuer wee shall see the Needle to conforme it selfe in such sort as it may lie Parallell with the Axell of the Earth, we may assure our selues that such a place is vnder the Equinoctiall Circle: The reason whereof, wee haue giuen in our 3 Chapter out of the Cō∣uertible nature of the Magnet, and here needs no repetition: only wee will insert this one figure where∣in the line CD drawne through the Centers of two Inclina∣tory Needles, lying Parallell to the Axell of the Earth, A. B. will expresse this Equinoctiall line which wee here seeke. For the Magneticall Inclinatory Needle being set in a Frame or Ring made for such a purpose, will vnder the Equator respect one Pole no more then another: but lie leuell with the Plaine of the Horizon: as vnder the Poles it will make right Angles with the Plaine of the Horizon. In the middle spaces betwitxt the Equatour and the Poles, it will conforme it selfe in such sort, as it makes certaine Angles with the Axell of the Earth, though not equall, yet proportionall to the Latitude; out of which an ingenious Artificer may deduce the Parallels of any place, without any obseruations of the Hea∣uens: as is taught by Instruments inuented by Gilbert, Ridley, and diuers others which haue vndertaken this subiect. 16 Of the Inuention of the Equatour wee haue spoken: In the site we ought to con∣sider the placing of the Equator in respect of the world. 1 The Equatour is an vnmoueable Circle, whose Poles neuer vary from the ixt Poles of the world. Whether the Poles of the Equator haue been any times varied from the Poles of the world, is a controuersie which hath exer∣cised the greatest wits: Ioseph Scaliger trusting (as it seemes) more to ancient History then Moderne experiment, seemes in two Epistles not only to make a doubt, whether the Poles of the Equatour haue continued the same with the Poles of the world; but super iliously (as the manner of most criticks is) rather out of coniecture then Reason, to taxe the common opi∣nion of manifest errour and absurdity. The ground and origi∣nall of this doubt growes out of the obseruation of the fixt Stars, which haue since the Times of the Ancients, beene found to bee moued out of their places, or at least not to retaine the same points in the Period of the Sunnes Motion. The chiefest Instances are taken from the stars in the Hornes of Aries, which in Hyparchus time, which liued aboue 60 yeeres before Ptolomy, were obserued to bee not much distant from the Equi∣noxe, and before him in the very point it selfe; but in our time remoued about 28 Degrees off: Also it is obserued in the Cynosure or Pole-star, that in Hyparchus time it was di∣stant from the Pole about 12 Degrees, which wee finde in our time to bee scarce 3 Degrees distant. To salue this Apparence, Ptolomy inuented a slow motion of the Starry Heauen or Fir∣mament, whereby the Fixt stars might bee remoued farther off from the Equinoctiall points in the Eclipticke, whence of a consequence the Pole-starre should not keep the same positi∣on in respect of the Pole it selfe, but vary his site according to the Motion: which opinion hath a long time passed without contradiction; till Copernicus out of new grounds sought for this Motion in the Earth, to which hee assigned no lesse then three Motions. Since Copernicus, arose Ioseph Scaliger, who contradicting the common receiued grounds, and yet for ought I see, not trusting to the suppositions of Copernicus, would bring in another opinion: to wit, that the Stars of the Firm ment are not moued from the point of the Equinoxe, but rather that the point is carryed away from the stars. The decision of this point I dare not vndertake, better becomming the learned and indu∣strious endeauours of our worthy Professours, M. Doctour Bain∣brigge, and M. Henry Brigges, as best suiting with their Learning and Profession: Ipse semipaganus, ad sacra vatum carmen offero nostrum. Neuerthelesse as a Learner, for mine owne satisfaction, I would willingly enter a little into conference with this great and admired Oracle Ioseph Scaliger, to sound the certainty of his grounds. That the Pole-starre (saith hee) was so far distant from the Pole as 12 Degrees, was no true obseruation, but the errour of Hyparchus, who afterwards by his authority deceiued Ptolo∣my ; and He, Posterity. The Reasons hee alleadged are, 1 Be∣cause Eudoxus which was more ancient then Hyparchus, ob∣serued the same star to bee in no other place, then where now it is. 2 Because that greater light of Astronomy, Copernicus percei∣uing the Equinoxes and Solstitiall points to be moued, was enfor∣ced to inuent other grounds; but because his demonstrations de∣pended only on the Apparences, hee sought out this effect in the motion of the Earth. If it were manners to oppose so great a Scholler as Ioseph Scaliger, I would aske a few questions, why we should not credite the obseruations of Hyparchus, Ptolomy, and all posterity, as well as of Eudoxus: sith Antiquity without consent & approbation, is no great argument of truth. Neuerthe∣lesse if the matter be well examined, we shall perhaps find Anti∣quity to be more firme on our side. The same reason (as I take it) may be giuen for the stars in the Hornes of Aries, as of the Pole-starre, because all the fixt-starres, by the consent of all, are imagi∣ned to keep the same vniforme site among themselues in such sort, as the varying of some would disorder all the rest: at least ar∣gue the like variety or change of all. Now to proue the stars of Aries to haue beene varyed, many of the Ancients (as Master Hues hath obserued) liuing in diuers times, haue confirmed. The first star of Aries, which in the time of Meto Atticus, was obserued in the Vernall Intersection, in the time of Thales Milesius was before it 2 Degrees; in Tymocharis age it was af∣ter it 2 Degrees 24 Minutes: In Hipparchus time 4 Degrees, 40 Minutes; in Abbumazars 17 Degrees, 50 Minutes; in Alba∣rens 18 Degrees, 10 Minutes; in Arzachels 19 Deg. 37 Min. in Alphonsus his time 23 Deg. 48 Min In the time of Coperni∣cus, and Rheticus, 27 Degrees, 21. Min. In our time about 28. Against all these Testimonies, if we should oppose the Testimo∣ny of Eudoxus and Sca iger, wee should bee thought very parti∣all to preferre them before the consent of Antiquity: Eudoxus though very Antient, being but one, and the other one of the last. If any should obiect, that Eudoxus spake onely of the Pole-starre, and not of the stars, in the hornes of Aries ; I ans∣were, as before, that the same reason is to bee giuen of them both; For as much, as if the Pole-starre in Eudozus time mo∣ued in a Parallell, Equidistant from the Pole of the Equatour (which he seemes to contend) then must also the stars of Aries, which were found once to bee in the point of the vernall Equi∣noxe, moue alwayes in the Equinoctiall circle, and neuer vary from it; which is contrary to all the Testimonies before allead∣ged. Secondly, where he saith, that Copernicus perceiuing this error, left a base discouery, without any Demonstration, ex∣cept onely , I would know how Ioseph Scali∣ger by any other meanes came to know it? I alwayes supposed it a principle amongst Mathematicians, that the had beene the surest ground of Mathematicall Demonstra∣tion: for euery reason which can be alleadged, must of necessi∣ty bee grounded on meere coniecture, as forged in a mans braine without any obseruation of Nature; or else suggested vnto vs from the things themselues. How little dependency is on the Former, let euery man iudge: where it is as easie for euery man to deny, as affirme; and such fancies are better reserued in the braine, wherein they were first hatched, then bee suffered to proceed further. If wee deriue our Argument (as we ought to doe) from the footsteppes of Nature; wee must draw it either from the Forme it selfe, or from some effect or propriety arising from it: The former is vnpossible I may well say in any thing; because the first forme and nature, no wayes discouers it selfe to our vnderstanding, but by the apparent Accidents: much lesse can this bee hoped for in the Heauens, being as far distant from vs in space, as Nature. If then we are left only to the later, what other ground can we haue of our Argumentation, then the or Apparences: which kind of way, Scaliger in Copernicus striues to sleight or reiect as weake or deficient: taking then this to bee the onely way to search as neere as wee can into the truth of their matters, wee will in the third place shew how far it may oppose Scaliger, and fauour our Asser∣tion. That the first Star of Aries is more distant from the Equi∣noctiall point, is a matter which seemes to bee agreed on by all sides. This Apparence must necessarily arise out of some Mo∣tion. This Motion must bee sought either in the Earth (as Co∣pernicus would haue:) or in the Heauens. That it cannot with any great probability bee in the Earth, wee haue shewed in the third Chapter, where wee haue proued it to haue a Magneticall verticity, whereby it continually respects the same Poles. The Arguments (I confesse) are only probable: but this is an opinion which Scaliger defendeth not. If wee seeke this effect in the Heauens, it must of necessity (which Scaliger confesseth) happen one of these 2 wayes: For either the stars standing vnmoueable, the Equinoctiall & Solstitiall points must bee moued, or els the stars themselues should moue, as Ptolomy defends. Here I cannot but remember a merry answer of that great Atlas of Arts, Sir Henry Sauile in the like question. Being once inuited vnto his Table, and hauing entred into some familiar discourses concer∣ning Astronomicall suppositions: I asked him what he thought of the Hypothesis of Copernicus, who held the Sunne to stand fixt, and the Earth to bee subiect to a Triple Motion: His answer was; hee cared not which were true, so the Apparences were solued, and the accompt exact: sith each way either the old of Ptolomy, or the new of Copernicus, would indifferently serue an Astronomer: Is it not all one (saith he) sitting at Dinner, whe∣ther my Table be brought to mee, or I goe to my Table, so I eat my meat? Such an answer would aswell befit this question: whether the first star of Aries should bee moued from the E∣quinoctiall point, or the point from it, 'tis a matter should little trouble a Cosmographer ; so either way might indifferently serue to salue the apparent obseruations: But how Scaliger vpon this granted supposition, would make all whole, without disturbing the order and forme of Nature in the celestiall Machine? what Regular motion he would giue the Sunne, whose period des∣cribes the Equinoctiall points, which he makes moueable? what other Poles he would assigne to the world besides that of the E∣quator? is a matter of a more curious search, and besides the li∣mits of my subiect: The full discussion of which points, as most of the rest: Illis relinquo quorum imagines lambunt—Hederae se∣quaces. 17 The lesser Parallels are equidistant lines ans∣wering to the Equator, which diuide the Globe of the Earth into two vnequall parts. 18 These lesser Parallels are againe of two sorts: either Named or Namelesse ; Named are such as are called by speciall names, and haue more speciall vse in Geographie; such as are the two Tropicks, and the two Polar circles. 19 The Tropicks are Parallels bounding the Suns greatest declination, which is either to the North, and is called the Tropicke of Cancer : or towards the South, and is called the Tropicke of Capricorne. The Tropickes haue taken their names from the conuersion or turning backe of the Sunne; because the Sunne declining from the Equinoctiall circle either North or South, proceedeth in his course no further then this circle, and so turneth backe: so that in the heauens they are as limits and bounds, comprehen∣ding within them that space, without the which the Sunne ne∣uer moues: Consonant to these Celestiall Tropicks, are there imagined in the earth the like, immediately placed vnder them: which are apparent, not onely by Application of the Celestiall Globe, and his parts to the Terrestriall; but also out of the Magneticall disposition of the earth, as wee haue already shew∣ed: The Tropicke bounding the Suns greatest declination to∣wards the North, is called the Tropicke of Cancer ; because the Sunne arriuing at that Tropicke, is lodged in the signe of Cancer : The other is termed the Tropicke of Capricorne ; because the Sunne touching that Tropicke, is in that signe: The distance of these Tropickes, from the Equatour, is ordinarily put 23 De∣grees, and 30 Minutes; which is also the distance of the Poles of the Eclipticke, from the Poles of the world. The Tropick of Can∣cer, as it is conceiued in the Earth; passeth by the greater Asia, by the Red-Sea, or Sinus Arabicus, and China, and India: But the Tropicke of Capricorne, situate on the Southerne side, run∣neth along by the most Southerne coast of Africke, and that part of America which is called Brasilia ; Besides many Ilands in the Indian Sea. 2 The Polar circles are Parallels answering to the Polar circles of the Heauens, drawne by the Poles of the Eclipticke: These are of two sorts: either the Articke compassing round the North-Pole; or the Antarticke compassing round the Antarticke or South Pole. The Polar Circles, as they are conceiued in the heauens by A∣stronomers, are described by the Poles of the Eclipticke, car∣ried by the diurnall motion about the Poles of the world. Correspondent to these circles in the heauens are imagined two circles on the earth, which wee also call Polar; and if wee beleeue Gilbert, with other Magneticall Philosophers, they are primarily in the Earth, as that which is the true subiect of diur∣nall motion. These circles thus described by the Pole of the E∣clipticke, must needs challenge the same distance from the Pole, which the Pole of the Eclipticke hath, to wit, 23. De∣grees, and 30 Minutes. The Greeks haue taken the Polar circles, in another sense then the Latines: for by these Polar circles (as it appeares by Proclus, and Cleomedes ) they vnderstand not such circles as are described by the Pole of the Zodiacke: but two o∣ther circles; whereof the one is greatest of all the Parallels, which alwayes appeares aboue our Horizon; the other is the greatest of all those Parallels which lie hid in our Horizon per∣petually: The reason why the Graecians tooke it in this sense, was; because by these circles they could know and distinguish those stars; which alwayes are seene and neuer set, as those which are comprehended of the Articke circle; from those which alwayes lie hidde and neuer rise; as such as the Antar∣ticke containes: Whence it manifestly appeares, that the two Polar circles, as they are taken of the Graecians in all Regions, are not of the same quantity & greatnesse, but are greater in oblique Spheare then in a right: but our Polar circles are at all places a∣like in their quantity. Of these, the one tearmed Articke in the Earth passeth by Islandia, the top of Norway and Finland, with many adioyning Ilands, and the Southerne part of Green-land, as may appeare by our ordinary Geographicall Mappes. The o∣ther Polar circle called Antarticke, passeth through the South part of the world (as yet) vndiscouered, except for some few parcels, as Terra del Feugo, and Psiitacorum Regio, with some∣what more, lately discouered by the Spaniards. The chiefest vse as well of these, as other parallels, is to distinguish the Zones and Climates in the Globe, whereof wee shall haue occasion to treate hereafter. 21 The Namelesse Parallels are such as are not knowne by speciall Names, nor of so great vse in Geographie. These namelesse parallels may bee well vnderstood by that which we haue aboue spoken: for howsoeuer they bee not cal∣led by particular and speciall names, yet are they all of the same nature: All these parallels beside the Equatour, though infinite in number, may notwithstāding in the spheare be reduced to the number of the Meridians; because they are drawne through the opposite points of the Meridian semicircle; so that wee might account 180: but yet there are not so many painted on the face of the Artificiall Globe; wherefore Ptolomy with the ancients, haue distinguished the parallels on both sides, North and South, beginning from the Equatour at such a distance, that where the day should increase one quarter of an houre, a new parallell should be placed: so that the longest day of one parallell, should exceed the longest day of another parallell by one quarter of an houre. Euery one of these parallels, is supposed to be diuided into 360 Degrees, as all the rest of the other circles; yet are we to note that the degrees and parts of a greater circle are greater; of the lesser, lesse, according to the proportion of the said circle; the same haue the proportion that a great circle hath to a lesse, so that the same degrees and parts of a quarter circle, to the de∣grees and parts of the lesser; as may be gathered from the first proposition of the second booke of Theodosius: now to know rightly this proportion, we must first finde out the summary de∣clination for euery region, which being once found, we may proceed in this manner, by the doctrine of Triangles. 1 Let the signe of the Complement of the Declina∣tion of the lesser Circle bee multiplied by the whole Circle, and the product bee diuided by the totall signe, there will arise the number of Degrees of the lesser Circle, such as whereof the greater consists. The reason hereof is shewed in Geometry, and therefore need we not to insert a demonstration; for there we learne, that as the totall inge is to the signe of the Cōplement of the Decli∣nation of any Parallell, so is the Periphery of the greater circle, to the Periphery of the Parallell▪ As for example, if we would know what proportion the Equatour hath to the Parallell, which passeth by the Verticall point of Rome ; whose Declination is about 42 Degrees; I multiply the signe of the Complement of this Declination, that is, the signe of 48 Degrees, to wit, 74314, by 360; the product whereof is, 26753040; which I diuide agayne by 100000, and find 267 degrees, and ½▪ whence I ga∣ther that the Equatour to the Parallell of Rome, or a degree of the Equatour, to a degree of the Parallell of Rome, hath the same proportion that that 360 hath to 276 ½, which is the same that 4 hath to 3. 22 Hitherto haue we spoken of the Absolute Circles, such as are the Meridians and Pa∣rallels: wee are to treate in the last place of a Relatiue Circle, which is conceiued in respect to our sight: this Circle is cal∣led the Horizon. 23 The Horizon is a Circle which diuides the vpper and visible parts of the Ter∣restriall Globe, from the lower and in∣uisible. The name of the Horizon is taken from the bounding or ter∣mination of the sight; because it is a Circle comprehending all that space which is visible of vs, distinguishing it from the rest which lurkes inuisible: as if a man should bee placed in a high and eminent place of the Earth, and should looke round about him euery way to the East, West, North, and South ; Hee will seeme to see the heauens on euery side to concurre with the earth: so that beyond it, can be seene nor heauen nor earth: which concurrence of the heauens with the earth, will describe vnto vs the Horizontall Circle for that place assigned. But here wee are to note, that the Horizon is two fold; either the Rationall or Sensible Horizon. The Rationall precisely diuides the Globe into two equall parts: But the sensible or apparent Horizon, is no other then that Circle in the earth, which is designed out by the sight, from which the name seemes to bee deriued. This sensible Horizon differs from the rationall diuers wayes; first, because the rationall diuides the whole spheare in∣to two equall parts; but the sensible into two vnequall parts. Secondly, because the rationall is alwayes certaine and the same, in the same place, and of alike greatnesse; whereas the o∣ther is greater or lesser, for the condition of the place or sight; for the semidiameter of the rationall, is the same with the se∣midiameter of the earth; but the semidiameter of the other, seldome or neuer exceeds 60 miles on the Earth. Thirdly, because the rationall Horizon passeth by the Center of the Earth; whereas the sensible toucheth onely the surface of it, in that point where the Inhabitant standeth: all which differen∣ces may bee seene in this Figure; wherein the Line CD represents vnto vs the sensi∣ble Horizon: the Line AB the ra∣tionall: The for∣mer is called Na∣turall or Physicall ; because it comes vnder the measure and apprehension of the sense: the other Astronomi∣call, because it is of great vse in Astronomy: in the resolution of the Hori∣zon into his parts, wee ought to consider two things: first, the Poles of the Horizon ; Secondly, his Periphery, or circumfe∣rence: The Poles are commonly called Zenith or Nadir: The Zenith is the Verticall point, directly placed ouer our Head: whereunto is opposite on the other side, the Nadir directly vnder our foote, and therefore may bee called the Pedall point. The parts or intersections in the circumferences, are designed out vnto vs, by certaine lines, discouering the coasts in the Ter∣restriall Globe: These lines are called either windes or Rhumbes: The windes with the Grecians were onely 8. But the latter Nauigators haue increased them to the number of 32, whereof foure were called Cardinall ; to wit, such as are directed to the foure coastes of East, West, North, and South: The other are Collaterall, being placed on each side of the Car∣dinall windes. The Rhumbes are Lines passing by the Verti∣call point of any place, as you may see in the Compasse going before: Now because one Rhumbe answers to two coasts or windes; the number of the Rhumbes is but halfe the num∣ber of the windes; to wit, 16. Here it is to bee noted, that a Rhumbe differs from a Winde ; whereas a Rhumber is one line, pointing out vnto vs, two windes or coasts: These Rhumbes as they are conceiued in the Globe, were thought by Nonnus to bee the portions of greater Circles: But learned M r Hues in his booke, out of vndoubted principles, strongly confutes him. The grounds which hee takes are these: First, that all Meridians of all places passe the Pole, and cut the Equatour and all his paral∣lels at right Angles. Secondly, If our course should bee directly any way else, then towards one of the poles, a new Meridian must succeed, and a new Horizon. Thirdly, that the Iron Needle being touched with the Load-stone, shewes the common section of the Meridian and the Horizon, and on one side perpetually respects the North, on the other the South. Fourthly, the same Rhumbe cuts all the Meridians atall places at equall Angles, and euery where respects the like coasts in the world. Fiftly, that a greater circle drawne by the Verticall points (if remoued from the Equatour) cannot cut diuers Meridians at equall Angles. Sixtly, a greater circle drawne by the Verticall point of any place, makes greater Angles with all other Meridians then with that, from which it was first drawne: whence it is necessa∣ry, that the line which shall bee supposed to make Angles with diuers Meridians (as the Rhumbes ) should bee bowed to∣ward the Meridian. I know not what would bee more said against the opinion of P. Nonnus, who would haue all the Rhumbes to bee portions of greater circles. To illustrate fur∣ther the nature and vse of the Horizon wee will insert these Theoremes. 2 The Sensible and Rationall Horizon in the Earth, are much different; in respect of the Fir∣mament, all one. Ptol. dict. 1. cap. 5. Alph. 6. diff. 6. It may bee gathered out of the suppositions of Ptolomy and Alphraganus, and almost all other Astronomers, that no man be∣ing placed on the surface of the earth can precisely see the halfe of it. For that Horizon which terminates our sight, as we haue shewed, is a plaine superficies euery way circularly extended in the Earth, in such sort as men placed, either in the Sea in a ship, or in a great field or Countrey, would thinke the visible part of the earth to bee plaine, whose ends would seeme to touch the Heauens. Whence must needs come to passe that such an Horizon cannot diuide the Spheare of the arth into two equall parts. For so much will be found wanting, as is measured betwixt that superficies which toucheth the earth, and that which passeth by the Center of it, equidistant from the other: for this later only can diuide the earth into 2 equall parts, Prop. 11. lib. 1. according to Theodosius, and may well bee seene in the Pag. 149. former figure, wherein are expressed both Horizons, as well the visible as inuisible, touching the Spheare in a point on the su∣perficies: as the Rationall passing by the Center. Neuerthe∣lesse wee must consider, that the quantity intercepted betwixt these two Horizons in the Terrestriall Spheare, is of little or no moment, compared with the whole frame of the Heauens: For sith the Heauens are so farre distant from vs, it will come to passe that if two equidistant lines should bee drawne, the one from the Eye, the other from the Center of the Earth to the Firmament, they would according to sense, appeare one and the selfe-same; by reason of the wonderfull distance: as wee see in a long Gallery, whose walls haue an equall distance the one from the other; the walls will notwithstanding (accor∣ding to Opticall principles) seeme widest where they are nee∣rest, and to close and shut vp at the ends, or at least to con∣curre neerer: much more must wee imagine this to happen in the sight, if we compare the greatnesse of the Firmament with the Spheare of the Earth, in whose magnitudes wee shall finde a incomparable disparity. This will appeare by the Appa∣rences: for wee shall see the six signes of the Zodiacke, conspi∣cuous aboue our Horizon, and the other six vnder it, hid from our sight: Also the Sunne and Moone, when they are diame∣trally opposed, almost at the same moment will appeare, the one in the East, the other in the West: at least the one will rise soone vpon the setting of the other: And (if we beleeue Pliny ) the Moone was obserued to bee eclipsed in the East point; the Sunne at the same time being in a sort aboue the Horizon in the West. Such an Eclipse could not happen without a diametrall opposition of the two lights, and therefore can the Sensible and the Rationall Horizon haue no sensible difference in respect of the Firmament. 2 The sensible Horizon may be greater or lesser ac∣cording to the nature and disposition of the place. In this consideration wee take no notice of the difference of sights, whether they be weaker or sharper; but suppose an eye sufficient to kenne so farre in the Earth, as the place will per∣mit: The difference then betwixt diuerse Horizons must bee sought out in the condition of the place. A Sight placed on the top of a high mountaine, may see much farther then one in a low valley, compassed about with hills; for as much as the Se∣midiameter of the sensible Horizon, which is equall to the Rayes or Lines drawne from the extreame parts of the visible Earth, are much greater. The most indifferent iudgement of this Horizon, may bee taken from the superficies of the Sea be∣yond sight of land: for a man thereon sayling in a ship, may per∣ceaue the surface of the Sea as a plaine, on euery side to bound the sight in a round circle, seeming together to terminate the end of the Earth, and protension of the sight. What the Semi∣diameter of this Horizon should bee, hath not beene yet agreed vpon by all: Erastothenes would haue it to bee 44 miles. Ma∣crobius 23. Proclus 250. Albertus Magnus 125. These diffe∣rences seeme too great to admit of reconcilement: yet taking into our consideration the disparity in account of miles betwixt the Moderne and Ancient Cosmographers; as also betwixt the Greekes and Latines: 2 the diuerse placing of the sight the various disposition of the places wherein they tooke their obser∣uations, with other circumstances, wee should diminish much of admiration. But diuerse others whose opinion is more appro∣ued by moderne Cosmographers, haue defined it to be about 63 miles. The cause why this Horizon should bee so little in respect of the Rationall which passeth by the Center, is the roundnesse of the earth interposed betwixt the sight and the farther parts, which we haue formerly proued. 3 The eye may be so placed on the Earth, as it may behold the whole Hemispheare of the heauens, and yet no part of the Terrestriall Spheare. This may seeme a paradoxe with vulgar iudgement; but it wants not a demonstration drawne from Astronomicall and Opticke principles. To explaine which, we must suppose out of the grounds already granted, 1 That the Sensible and Rationall Horizon in respect of the Heauens, ought to bee esteemed one and the selfe same, by reason of the great distance and dispropor∣tion betwixt the Earth and the Firmament. 2 That the eye of the beholder is in this sort supposed to bee in the Center; be∣cause in this consideration the distance betwixt the superficies of the Earth, and her Center, is insensible. 3 That the visuall Ray wherein the sight is carried, is alwayes a right line. Now suppose (accor∣ding to our for∣mer figure) the Center of the eye wherein consists the sight, to be in the point of the Terrestriall sur∣face F, the di∣stance (as wee said) betwixt F and E the Center being insensible, the eye is imagi∣ned in the center: likewise the Horizons CFD, and AEB for the same cause in respect of the Heauens are to bee esteemed one and the same; because CA and DB haue no sensible difference. It is then manifest, that the eye so placed will behold in the heauenly Spheare, all which is included betwixt A and B, to wit, the Hemispheare AGB, bounded by the Rationall Horizon AEB. Neuerthelesse in the Terrene Globe it can see no∣thing at all: For either it should see onely the point F, where∣in it is seated, or else some other point or part distant from it: the former cannot bee admitted, because the eye being there supposed to bee placed, should according to this suppositi∣on behold it selfe, which is against philosophy: For granting the sense only a direct and not a reflexe operation, it cannot bee imagined how it should perceiue it selfe. Finally, it cannot see any point in the Earth besides; for then this point would ei∣ther bee placed aboue the point F: but this cannot bee; because F being supposed in the superficies, admits of no point higher in the Spheare, or else vnder it: but this cannot bee, be∣cause CFD being a tangent line, and touching the Spheare in F only: there cannot according to Geometricall principles bee drawne any right line from the point F, which can touch any point in the said Spheare, but all will cut it, and so the section cause impediment to the sight, the Earth being an opacous and round body. 4 From the Horizontall circle is reckoned the ele∣uation of the Pole in any place assigned. The finding out of the eleuation of the Pole is a matter most necessary for a Cosmographer; as shall appeare after, where we shall speake of the Latitudes and Climates. It is de∣fined to bee an arch of the Meridian betwixt the Horizon and the Pole. For the finding out of which many wayes haue beene deuised by Artificers: The first is taken from the Sunne, the se∣cond from the Pole-starre: From the Sun it may bee performed two wayes. 1 At the time of the Equinoxe. 2 At any other time of the yeere. At the time of the Equinoxe it may be found out by the obseruation of the Sunnes shadow at Noone-tide, in this manner: Let the Meridian height of the Sunne bee sub∣tracted from the whole quadrant, which is 90 degrees: there will remaine the distance of the Zenith to the Equator, which is equall to the eleuation of the Pole. In the second place at a∣ny time of the yeere to know the eleuation of the Pole out of the Meridian height of the Sunne, it is necessary out of an Ephi∣merides, or any other way, accurately to finde out the place of the Sunne in his Eclipticke for the day proposed, together with his declination: for the declination of the Sunne, the Sunne be∣ing in the six Northerne signes, subtracted from the Meridian altitude; or added, the Sunne being in the six Southerne signes, will precisely giue the height of the Equator: or (which is the same) the Meridian heigth of the Sun in the Equinoctiall: which being once found, we may worke as in the former. By the Pole-starre wee may likewise find it out, if wee obserue it three di∣stinct times in the same night: for three points being giuen, e∣uery Geometrician will finde out the Center, which in this case must bee the Pole. Many other wayes haue beene inuented by skilfull Astronomers, which appertaining rather to Astronomy then Cosmography. I purposely omit. 24 Concerning the Horizon, two things are chiefly to bee noted, the Inuention and the Distinction. The Inuention is considered either as it concernes the Zenith or Pole: or the Plaine of the Horizon. For both which we will set downe these Rules. 1 The height of the Pole subtracted from the quadrant of 90 Degrees: the residue will shew the Zenith or distance of the Zenith from the Pole. The reason is euident; because the height of the Pole, toge∣ther with the distance of the Pole and the Zenith make an arch, which is a whole quadrant: so that the height of the Pole sub∣ducted, the distance will remaine; as for example, if wee put the eleuation of the Pole here in Oxford, to be 51 ½ degrees or there∣about (as hath been formerly taught: Let these 51 ½ degrees bee subtracted from 90, then will remaine 38 ½, which is the true Zenith for that place. 2 A line which makes right angles with a plummet perpendicularly falling on it, will designe the Horizontall plaine. The practise of the proposition is vsually shewed by Artifi∣cers by a certaine instrument called a Leuell, which is made in a triangle forme: from the vertex, or head of which, a line with a plummet fals on the Basis. Now when it shall bee found to be so placed, that the line and plummet falling on the Basis, shall make right Angles with it, and cut the whole Triangle in∣to two equall halfes: wee may account the Base-line to bee the plaine of the Horizon: For of this plaine, such is the position, that it inclines no more on the one side then on the other, but lies euen: as wee see in the surface of the water, when it rests quiet without motion: for howsoeuer the water so resting (as we haue formerly demonstrated) is alwayes sphericall, yet in a small distance in the sensible Horizon, it may to sense be repre∣sented by a plaine. 25 So much for the Inuention: The Distin∣ction of the Horizon is into three sorts: for either it is a right Horizon, or oblique, or parallell. 26 A right Horizon is that which with the Equator makes Right Angles. This distinction growes naturally out of the Respect of the Horizon to the Equatour. For sith the Equatour is one and the selfe-same immoueable circle; and the Horizon is mutable and changed according to his diuerse verticall points, they cannot alwayes keepe the same situation in regard one of the other. This they haue reduced into three heads: for either it is Right or Oblique, or Parallell. The Right is so called from the right Angles which the Horizon makes with the Equator: wherein the two poles are alwayes couched in the Horizon, and the E∣quator passing directly ouer their heads, as is plaine to be seene in this figure here af∣fixed: such an Horizon haue these Inhabitants which dwell directly vnder the E∣quinoctiall line, in the very middest of the Torrid Zone: such an Horizon agrees to a great part of Africke: to a part of Peru in America: Also to most of the Molucco Ilands, the Ilands of Taprobana, and S. Thomas: but no part of Europe is subiect to such a Right Horizon. The cause of this va∣riation of Horizons is the naturall roundnesse of the Earth: For the earth being supposed to bee sphericall, as we haue before demonstrated, it must of necessity follow, that the site of the poles should be changed according to the diuersity of the places. Also, because wheresoeuer we are placed on the Earth (as wee haue shewed) all impediments of the sight, as mountaines and vallies put apart, we can behold the Hemispheare of the Hea∣uens, which middle part being set downe is diuided from the part vnseene, by the Horizon it must needs bee, that either both the poles must be in the Horizon: and so make a Right Spheare: or at least one must bee aboue and seene, and the other hid from the sight, and so much as one is eleuated aboue the Horizon, must the other bee couched vnder it▪ For otherwise wee should see more or lesse then a precise moity, or halfe of the Heauens: sith the poles differ one from the other the halfe of the whole Hea∣uens: to wit, by the Diameter of the world. 27 An oblique Horizon is that which with the Equator makes oblique Angles. Those Inhabitants are said to haue an oblique Horizon, whose site and position declines somewhat from the Equator, either to the North or South towards either pole: yet so that the pole bee not eleuated so high as 90 Degrees: for then it becomes a Parallell Horizon, as wee shall shew in the next. The represen∣tation of such an oblique Spheare may bee seene in this Dia∣gram: wherein the Horizon cuts the Equatour at oblique Angles, whence it is called oblique. Clauius seemes to adde ano∣ther reason of this appellati∣on: to wit, because in such an Horizon one pole is al∣wayes eleuated aboue, and the other hid▪ but this rea∣son seemes too generall, as that which agrees not onely to an Oblique, but also to a Parallell Spheare. From this Horizon, by Iohannes de Su∣crobosco, the Spheare is called Artificiall ▪ because, as Clauius coniectures, it is variable, and doth naturally diuide the Globe. For whereas the Horizon of the Right Spheare passeth by either Pole, it seemes by it selfe (as it were) Naturally and Directly to diuide the Spheare: and this diuision is no way variable, as that it should bee more or lesse Right: but contrariwise in the oblique Spheare, sith one Pole is placed aboue, and the other beneath, it seemes to be placed out of his naturall site and position. Moreouer this Oblique Horizon is variable according to the diuersity of ha∣bitations, so that it may be to some more, to others lesse Oblique: for so much the more Oblique must it be, by how much the nee∣rer it is placed to the Poles. The Inhabitants of an Oblique Spheare are such as seated betwixt the Equator, and either of the Tropicks of Cancer and Capricorne, or such as dwell betwixt either Tropicke and the Polar-circle▪ 28 A Parallell Horizon is that which lies Paral∣lell to the Equator, making no angles at all with it. Such a kinde of Horizon those Inhabitants are said to haue which are included betwixt the Poles of the world, and the Po∣lar circles; whose Horizon cuts not the Equatour at any Angles at all, either Right or Oblique: but lies Parallell vnto it, as we see in this Figure here set downe. Some haue reduced this kinde of Spheare to an Oblique Horizon: in regard that in this site our Pole is e∣leuated aboue the Horizon, and the other depressed vn∣der: in which opinion Claui∣us seemes to second Iohannes de Sacrobosco, on whom hee comments. But this is ridicu∣lous; because the Spheare is called Right or Oblique (as wee haue taught) from the Angles which the Horizon makes with the Equator: wherefore that Horizon which makes no Angles at all, cannot bee called either Right or Oblique, but is necessarily distinguished from either. On this distinction of Horizons is grounded the diuision of the Inhabitants of the Earth according to three kinds of Spheares: of whose accidents and proprieties wee shall more fully treat hereafter in the dictinction of the parts and Inhabitants of the Terrestriall Spheare, because such proprieties cannot so well be taught without the knowledge of the Artificiall Spheare, whose Nature and Fabricke wee shall labour (God willing) in our next Chapter to vnfold. CHAP. VII. Of the Artificiall Representation of the Terrestriall Spheare. 1 HAuing hitherto treated of the Terre∣striall Spheare, as it is Naturall or re∣all: wee are in the next place to speake of the Artificiall Globe: The Artificiall Globe is an expression or imitation of the Spheare of the Earth. 2 The Artificiall imitation of the Earth is either Common or Magneticall. The common is againe twofold; either in the Globe, or in the Geogra∣phicall Mappe, or Table. 3 The Geographicall Globe is a round solid Body, adorned with Lineaments & pictures, seruing for the vse of Geographers. Who was the first Inuentour of this Artificiall Globe, it is not euident: some thinke with Pliny, that it was found out by Atlas, and carried into Greece by Hercules. Others haue ascribed it to Anaximander Milesius ; some to Musaeus, as Diogenes Laërtius : others to other Authors, amongst whom Architas Tarentinus is not forgotten, as one that was esteemed the rarest Mathema∣tician of his time. But all these were out-stripped by Archi∣medes the Syracusan Mathematician, who is said to haue com∣posed a Spheare of transparent glasse, representing vnto the life the whole frame of the Heauens, wherein the Sunne, Moone, and Starres with their true motions, periods, and limits were shewed to the sight, in such sort, as if it were naturall where∣of Claudian the Poët elegantly wrote in these Verses. Claudian. in Epigrammat. Iupiter in paruo cùm cerneret aethera vitro, Risit, & ad Superos talia dicta dedit: Huccine mortalis progressa potentia curae? Iam meus infragili uditur orbe labor. Iura poli, rerum{que} fidem▪ legés{que} Deorum, Ecce Syracusius transtulit arte Senex. Inclusus varijs famulatur spiritus astris, Et viuum certis motibus vrget opus. Percurrit proprium mentitus signifer annum, Et simulata nouo Cynthia mense redit. Iam{que} suum voluens audax industria mundum, Gaudet & humana sidera mente regi. Quid falso insontem tonitru Salmonea miror? Aemula naturae parua reperta manus. In a small glasse when Ioue beheld the Skies, He smil'd, and thus vnto the gods replies: Could man so far extend his studious care, To mocke my labours in a brittle Spheare? Heauens lawes, mans wayes, and Natures soueraigne right, This Stage of Syracuse translates to sight. A soule within on various stars attends, And moues the quicke-worke vnto certaine ends, A faigning Zodiacke runnes his proper yeere, And a false Cynthia makes new monethes appeare: And now bold Art takes on her to command, And rule the Heauenly Starres with humane hand. Who can admire Salmonean harmlesse Thunder, When a flight hand stirres Nature vp to wonder? But this Spheare of Archimedes I take to be more then an ordinary Globe commonly vsed amongst vs, as may appeare by the Poëts description; so that it may rather be likened to the Spheare, lately composed by Cornelius Trebelius, and presented vnto King Iames. The like whereof Peter Ramus sayes he saw two at Paris ; yet not of glasse, but of Iron; the one of which Ruellius the Physician brought from the spoiles of Sicily: the o∣ther of which Orontius the Mathematician recouered likewise from the Germane warres. But of such kind of Globes hauing neuer yet had the happines to see any, I intend no description: In the meane time our common Geographicall Globes may well serue our turnes. 4 In the Terrestriall Globe two things are to be considered: 1 The Fabrick or Structure. 2 The Vse. 3 The Direction. In the former is taught the composition of the Globe by resoluing of it into it's parts. 1 The parts whereof the Globe is Geographically compounded are circles and pictures. To explaine the true composition of the Artificiall Globe, not Physically as it consists of timber and mettall, but Geogra∣phically as it represents the Earth, we are to consider, that the parts of it are either Externall or Internall: Externall I call those parts which are without the Spheare it selfe, yet necessa∣rily concurre to the constitution of it. These parts are such as concurre to the making of the Stocke or Frame whereunto our Spheare is set: where to let passe the footing or lower board, (wherein in the old Globes was engraffed a Marriners Com∣passe, with a Needle magnetically touched, very profitable for the direction of the Spheare) I will onely speake of the great Timber Circle, encompassing round the whole Globe: because it more immediatly concernes our purpose. This Circle repre∣sents the Horizon of the Naturall Spheare: In the Globe it is made but one, not that there is but one Horizon in the whole Earth; because (as we haue taught) the Horizon is varyed ac∣cording to the places: but because it is impossible to point and marke out the Horizons; for all places being infinite as the Ver∣ticall points: yet may this one serue for all places, because the Globe being moueable, may apply all his parts to this circle. This Circle representing the Horizon, is diuided into three borders or Limbes: whereof the first which is towards the Spheare, containes all the signes with the Planets thereunto be∣longing; euery of which is diuided into 30 Degrees, which in the Timber Circle are described by set numbers and markes. The second which is the middle-most and largest, contaynes the Calendar, with the Golden number, and seuerall names of all the Feasts throughout the yeare. The third and last is of the 22 Windes, seruing chiefly for the vse of Marriners, and may serue many wayes for a Geographer to distinguish the Coasts and points of the Earth. But of these three borders distinguished in the Horizon, only the last hath vse in Geography ; the other two are in themselues Astronomicall, and placed in the Geographi∣call Globe rather for ornament, then vse. The Internall parts of the Globe are either annexed or inscribed in the face of the Spheare. The Annexed part is that which represents the Meri∣dian, which is a Brasen circle: For as the Externall Frame of the Globe contained the Horizon as one circle; so this Meridi∣an is set but one, although it bee in it selfe various, according to the places to which it serue. Neither without good reason is this Circle made of brasse, because it should serue for diuerse vses, which require that it should bee often changed and turned to and fro, which being of Timber would miscarry. This Bra∣sen Meridian meetes with the Horizon at two opposite places, cutting it at right angles, that the Spheare included might bee raysed and set lower, as occasion requireth. The Meridian circle is agayne diuided into 4 Quadrants, each of which is againe di∣uided into 90 Degrees ; so that on the one side the 90 th Degree must touch the Pole; on the other side the first degree; so that in all there will arise 360 degrees, described in the Brasen Me∣ridian. Through this Brasen Meridian by the two Poles doth passe a line or wier, which is called the Axell-tree of the Globe, about the which the Spheare is turned, the ends of which are commonly called the Poles; whereof the one representing the North point is called the Pole Articke ; the other shewing the South, is termed Antarticke. To this Meridian Circle in the Globe is commonly fastned a little Brasen Circle, named Cyclus horarius or the houre-circle ; but this rather appertaines to A∣stronomy then Geography, and therefore wee will forbeare to describe it: somewhat more vse haue wee of another Instrument fastned to the Meridian, called the Quadrant of Latitude ; for∣as much as it may serue to measure the Distance betwixt any two places signed in the Globe: but in so grosse an Instrument little exactnesse can bee expected. Now for such matters as are inscribed in the Spheare it selfe, (to let passe ridiculous & idle pictures vsed of Painters for ornament) they are either Lines & Circles drawne on the face of the Globe: or else the pictures & delineations of Countreyes and places, marked out in visible proportions; whereof the former properly appertaines to the Sphericall part of Geography; the latter to the Topicall. The Circular Lineaments are againe twofold: either Circles necessa∣rily appertaining to the constitution of the Globe; or else Lines thereon drawne to bee considered of Marriners, which we haue before called the Rhumbes. But these Lines also (as wee haue taught) appertaine to the Geographer, being as many sections of the Horizontall Circle; because they are alwayes imagined to proceed from a Verticall point wherein they meet. The Circles painted on the Globe are either the Parallels or Meridians, whose description we haue set downe in the chapter before: A∣mongst the Parallels the most remarkable is the Equatour, which is made greater then all the rest, in forme of a bracelet, distin∣guished into degrees, and marked at euery 10. degrees: Next to this are the Tropicks and Polar Circles, represented only by blacke Lines, yet framed in such sort, that they may easily bee discerned from other Parallels. Amongst the Meridians the most notable is the first Meridian passing by the Canaries, and pain∣ted much like the Equatour, cut into diuers sections and de∣grees, in such sort as wee haue described: For the Zodiacke which is vsually pictured in the Terrestriall Globe, I hold it al∣together needlesse in Geography, and made rather for orna∣ment, then vse; for as much as the periodicke course of the Sun, deciphered by the Eclipticke, appertaines rather to the Theory, of the planets, which is the hardest part of Astronomy. The pro∣portion of these Circles, Site, and Distance is taught before, and needs no repetition, sith it is the very same in representati∣on on the face of the Globe, which is really in the Earth it selfe. For the pictures and Topicall description of the Earth, wee re∣ferre it to the second and third part of this Treatise; where we shall haue occasion to speake of Countreyes and Regions, with their seuerall qualities, accidents, and dispositions. 2 The vse of the Artificiall Globe is to expresse the parts of the Earth so farre forth as they haue a diuerse situation as well one n respect of ano∣ther, as of the Heauens. The vse of the Artificiall Globe is two-fold, either generall or speciall: the Generall is expressed in this Theoreme: the Speciall shall be shewne in diuerse speciall propositions hereaf∣ter as occasion shall serue. 5 This Direction is taught in the Rule. 1▪ The Meridian for the place being found by the Sunne or Compasse. 1 Let the Globe bee so set, that the North Pole respect the North, the oppo∣posite the South. 2 Let the Pole in the Meridi∣an of the Globe be set according to the eleuation of the Pole at the place assigned. 6 A Geographicall Mappe is a plaine Table, wherein the Lineaments of the Terrestriall Spheare are expressed and described in due site and proportion. Some would haue the name of a Mappe to be drawne from the linnen furniture wherewith it is endorsed; which is not vn∣likely, in regard of the affinity of the words in Latine. But more significantly by others it is termed a Geographicall Ta∣ble or Chart: A Mappe differs from a Globe, in that the Globe is a round solide body, more neerely representing the true fi∣gure of the Earth, whereas contrarywise the Charts of them∣selues are plaine, though representing a Spheare, inuented to supply the wants of a Globe. For whereas a Globe is more cost∣ly to be procured of poore Students, and more troublesome to be carried to and fro; a Mappe is more cheape to be bought, and far more portable: And howsoeuer it be not so apt an expres∣sion as the Globe, yet are there few matters represented in the other, which may not in some sort find place in this. And cer∣tainly such is the vse and necessity of these Tables, that I hardly deeme him worth the name of a Scholler, which desires not his Chamber furnished with such ornaments. It is written of that learned man Erasmus Roterodamus, that hauing seene 50 yeares, he was delighted so much with these Geographicall Mappes, that vndertaking to write Comments on the Acts of the A∣postles, he had alwayes in his eye those Tables, where hee made no small vse for the finding out of the site of such places where∣of he had occasion to treate. And it were to bee wished in these dayes, that yong Students insteed of many apish and ridiculous pictures, tending many times rather to ribaldry, then any lear∣ning, would store their studies with such furniture. These Geo∣graphicall Mappes are of two sorts, either Vniuersall or Parti∣cular: The Vniuersall are such as represent the picture of the whole Earth. The particular are such as shew only some parti∣cular Place or Region. These particular Tables are againe of two sorts; some are such as describe a place in respect of the Hea∣uens, whereon are drawne the Geographicall lineaments by vs described, at least the chiefest: some againe are such as haue no respect at all to the Heauens; such as are the Topographicall Mappes of Cities and Shires, wherein none of the Circles are described. For the Vniuersall and first sort of particular Maps, there is no question but they properly appertaine to Geography: But the later deserue much lesse consideration, as being too spe∣ciall for this generall Treatise. 7 The Geographicall Mappe is twofold: ei∣thre the Plaine Chart, or the Planispheare: The Plaine Chart we call that which consistes of one face and Right lines. Such a Chart wee find commonly set foorth vnder the name of the Marriners Sea-Chart: for howsoeuer it seemes to haue chiefest vse in Nauigation, yet is the Nature and vse of it more generall: as that which not onely expresseth the Sea, but the whole Terrestriall Globe: For as much as the Parallels, Meri∣dians, and Rhumbes, whereof primarily it consists, are circles common to the whole, and not appropriated to either part. 8 In the Plaine-Chart we are to consider two things First the Ground. Secondly the In∣scription. The Ground is the space or Plat∣forme wherein the Lines are to be inscri∣bed: the Inscription teacheth the manner how to proiect the Lines. In the Chart two things are remarkable; to wit, the plaine whereunto the Lines are inscribed: Secondly the Lines or In∣scription it selfe: so wee are here to handle two points: First how this Plaine-Chart should bee conceiued to bee produced out of the Globe; whereof it is a representation. Secondly what rule or method wee ought to vse for the inscription of the Meri∣dians, parallels, Rhumbes, and other Lineaments thereunto an∣nexed. Both which depend on these propositions. 1 The Geographicall Chart is a Parallellogramme conceiued to be made out of a Spheare, inscribed in a Cylinder, euery part thereof swelling in Longitude and Latitude, till it apply it selfe to the hollow su∣perficies of the said Cylinder. This Theoreme seeming at the first obscure, consists of ma∣ny parts, which being once opened, will soone take light. First then to know the Ground-worke of this Parallellogramme thus defined, wee must suppose a Sphericall superficies, Geographi∣call or Hydrographicall, with Meridians and parallels to bee in∣scribed into a concaue Cylinder, their Axes agreeing in one. Secondly wee must imagine the superficies thus inscribed, to swell like a bladder, blowing equally in euery part, as well in Longitude, as Latitude, till it apply it selfe round about, and all along towards either pole, vnto the concaue superficies of the Cylinder; so that each parallell on this superficies, successiuely growes greater from the Equinoctiall towards either Pole, vn∣till it challenge equall Diameter with the Cylinder: and like∣wise all the Meridians growing wider and farther off, till they bee as farre distant euery-where as is the Equinoctiall one from the other. Hence may easily bee vnderstood the true Mathema∣ticall production or generation of this part: for first of a Spheri∣call superficies it is made a Cylinder: and secondly of a Cylinder it is made a Parallellogramme, or plaine superficies: For the con∣caue superficies of a Cylinder is nothing else but a plaine Paral∣lellogramme, imagined to bee wound about two equall equidi∣stant circles, hauing one common Axell-tree perpendicular vp∣on the Centers of them both; and the Peripheries of them both, equall to the length of the Parallellogramme, as the distance be∣twixt those Centers is equall to the bredth thereof: In this Chart so conceiued to be made, all places must needs be situate in the same Longitudes and Latitudes, Meridians, Parallels, and Rhumbes, which they had in the Globe it selfe: because we haue imagined euery point betwixt the Equatour and the Poles, to swell equally in Longitude and Latitude, till it apply it selfe to the concauity of the Cylinder: so that no point can bee displaced from his proper seat, but only dilated in certaine proportion. And this I take to bee the best conceit for the ground-worke or plat∣forme of this Geographicall Chart. 2 Except the distances betwixt the Parallels in a Plaine-Chart be varied: it cannot bee excused from sensible errour. It hath beene thought by many Geographers, that the Earth cannot aptly according to due symmetry and proportion be ex∣pressed in a plaine superficies, as it is in the Globe: for as much as that which is ioyned and vnited in the Globe, being of a Sphericall figure, is in the Mappe extended and dilated to a di∣uerse longitude and latitude from that Sphericall delineation: and although it hath been generally conceited by many writers, that no due proportion could bee obserued in a Sphericall super∣ficies, without sensible errour: yet most exception hath beene made against this Chart here mentioned, consisting of one face and straight lines, which in substance (if we cōsider the Circles) differs not from the Nauticall Chart: of whose errours Martin Cortese, Peter Nonnus, and many others haue complained: which escapes are excellently opened and reformed by our Countryman Edward Wright in his Correction of Nauticall Errours. The reason or ground which drew these men to thinke that the Earth could not bee proportionably described in a plaine superficies, proceeded from the common proportion of the Lines and Circles on the Chart. For supposing the Parallels cutting the Meridians at equall Angles, to obserue an equall di∣stance euery-where one from the other; these errours and ab∣surdities must of necessity ensue. First, what places soeuer are delineate in the ordinary Chart, the length of them from East to West hath a greater proportion to the bredth from North to South then it ought to haue, except onely vnder the Equi∣noctiall: and this errour is so much the more augmented, by how much those places are distant from the Equinoctiall: for the neerer you approach the Pole, the proportion of the Meri∣dian to the Parallell still increaseth; so that at the Parallell of 60 degrees of latitude, the proportion of the length to the bredth is twice greater then it ought to bee; for as much as the Meridian is double to that Parallell, and so in all the rest: whence as Edward Wright obserues, the proportion of the length of Friesland to the bredth thereof, is two-fold greater then in the Globe which expresseth the true proportion; be∣cause the Meridian is double to the Parallell of that Iland. In like sort it is plaine, that in the Ilands of Grock-land and Groen∣land, the length to the bredth hath a foure-fold greater pro∣portion in the Common Chart, then in the Globe; because the Meridian is foure-fold greater then the Parallell of those pla∣ces. Wherefore it cannot be conceited, that the manner of fin∣ding out the difference of Longitude by the common Chart, can bee any-where true without sensible errour, except onely vnder the Equinoctiall, or neere about it; because in no other place the Parallell is equall to the Meridian. In other places the errour will bee sensible, according to the difference of the Meridian, and Parallell of that place: whereas if the contrary were granted, it would follow, that two ships sayling from North to South, vnder two seuerall Meridians, would keepe the same distance the one from the other of longitude neere the Pole, which they had neere the Equatour; which is impossible: because Meridians cannot bee Parallell the one to the other, but by how much they approach the Pole, by so much they are neerer, that in the end they all concurre and meete in the Pole it selfe. Secondly this common Chart admitted, there would a∣rise great errours not onely in the situation of diuers places, which appeare to bee vnder the same Meridian, but also in the bearing of places one to the other. The reason is manifest, for that the Meridian is a certaine Rule of the site and position of places: therefore whensoeuer any errour shall be committed in the Site and Position of the Meridian, there must needs follow errours in the designation of the Rhumbes, and other points of the Compasse. And therefore euery respectiue position of place to place, set downe in the common Chart, cannot bee warran∣ted. A pregnant example wee haue in the way from India ; for the Promontory of Africke, called the Promontory of three Points; hauing of Northerne latitude 4 Degrees and a halfe, and the Iland of Tristan, Acugna, hauing 36 degrees of Southerne latitude, are in the common Chart set vnder the same Meridian: But the Chart sheweth the distance betweene these Ilands, and the Cape of good Hope to come neere to 400 leagues; both which cannot stand together; for if all the coast from the Pro∣montory of Three Points, vnto the Cape of Good-hope be right∣ly measured, and the Promontory of Three Points lye also vn∣der the same Meridian with those Ilands, yet must the distance bee much lesse: But if it be not lesse, it cannot stand with reason that it should haue the same Meridian with the Promontory of Three Points, but must needes lye more Westward. Thirdly, there must needs arise a greater errour in the translating Sea∣coasts and other such places out of the common Chart, into the Globe; because they haue only a respect to the Numbers of Degrees of Longitudes and Latitudes found therein; so that not onely errours appeare in the Sea-Chart, but also other∣where thence deriued. These and many more errours haue been detected in the common Sea-chart, which (as we haue said) res∣pecting the circles, ought to be imagined one and the selfe-same with the proiection of the lines in a Geographicall table; which ouersight Ger. Mercator in his vniuersall Map seemes to correct: yet leaues no demonstration behind him to teach others the cer∣taine way to draw the Lines, as Meridians, Parallels, & Rhumbes on the Chart, in such sort, as these errours might be preuented, and the due proportion and symmetry of places well obserued. But our industrious Countryman hath waded through all these difficulties, and found out the true demonstration of a proiecti∣on of these Lines to be inscribed in the Chart in such sort, as no sensible errour can shew it selfe, from whose copious industry wee will extract so much as may serue our purpose, onely con∣tracting his inuention into a shorter method, hauing many mat∣ters to passe through in this Treatise. 2 The Distances of the Parallels in the Chart must encrease proportionably as the Secantes of the la∣titude. It hath been a conceiued errour (as we haue shewed) that all the parallels in the Chart here mentioned, should euery-where keep the same Distances one from the other, from the Equator to the poles; yet because no man (for ought I know) hath out of Geometricall grounds discouered the true proportion, be∣side my fore-named Author; I must herein also follow his dire∣rection as neere as I can in his owne footsteps; because I would not any way preiudice his Inuention. First therefore wee must consider in that Chart, because the parallels are equall one to the other, (for euery one is set equall to the Equinoctiall) the Meridians also must bee parallell and straight Lines, and by con∣sequence the Rhumbes, making equall angles with euery Meri∣dian, must bee also straight lines. Secondly, because the spheri∣call superficies whereof the Chart is imagined to be produced, is conceiued to swell and enlarge it selfe euery-where equally, that is, as well in Longitude as Latitude, till it accommodate it selfe to the hollownesse of the Cylinder, round about: there∣fore at euery point of Latitude in this Cylinder so dilated, a part of the Meridian obtaines the same proportion to the like part of the Parallell, that the like parts of the Meridian and Pa∣rallell haue to each other in the Globe without sensible er∣rour. Now for as much as like parts of the wholes, haue the same proportion that these wholes haue; therefore the like parts of any Parallell or Meridian of the Spheare haue the same proportion that the same Parallels and Meridians haue: For example sake, as the Meridian is double to the Parallell of 60 Degrees, so a Degree, Minute, or other part, is also double to a Degree, Minute, or other part of the Parallell; and what proportion the Parallell hath to the Meridian, the same must their Diameters and Semidiameters haue one to the other: as is taught by Geometricians. Now the Signe of the Complement of the Parallels latiude or distance from the Equinoctiall, is the semi-diameter of the said Parallell; as in this Diagramme here inserted may easily appeare: for AE the signe of AH the comple∣ment of AF, the latitude of the Pa∣rallell ABCD from the Equino∣ctiall is the semi-diameter of the Parallell ABCD; and as the semi-diameter of the Meridian or whole signe is to the semi-diameter of the Parallell; so is the secant or Hypo∣tenuse of the Parallells latitude to the semi-diameter of the Meridian, or to the whole signe, as FK (that is) AK, to AE (as is) GK, so is IK to FK: therefore in this Geographicall Chart, the semi-diameter of each Parallell being equall to the semidiameter of the Equinoctiall or whole signe, the parts of the Meridian at euery point of latitude, must of necessity en∣crease with the same proportion wherewith the Secants of the Arch contained betweene these points of latitude and the Equinoctiall encrease: out of which Geometricall grounds thus explained, will arise a certaine and easie methode for the making of a table by the helpe of Trigonometry, where∣by the Meridian in any Geographicall or Hydrographicall table may truly and in due proportion diuide it selfe into parts, from the Equinoctiall towards either Pole: for taking for granted, each distance of each point of latitude, or of each Parallell one from the other, to comprehend so many points as the secants of the latitude of each point or Parallell containes, wee may draw out a table by continuall addition of the secants answerable vnto the latitude of each Parallell, vnto the summe compounded of all the former Secants; beginning with the secants of the first Parallels latitude, and thereunto adding the second Parallels la∣titude, and to the summe of both these, adding the third Paral∣lels latitude, and so forth in all the rest: and this Table will shew the sections and points of latitude in the Meridian of the Geographicall Mappe; through which sections the Parallels ought to bee drawne: which Table wee haue lately set out by Edward Wright in his Correction of Nauticall Errours, to whom for further satisfaction in this kind, I referre the diligent Rea∣der. Out of the same grounds we may also deduce the Rumbes: for sith that the Chart (as wee haue shewed) is nothing else but a plaine Parallellogramme, conceiued to be made of the extension of a Sphericall superficies, inscribed in a concaue Cylinder, it must needs be that the Rumbes make equall Angles with all the Meridians. Therefore if in the Chart a circle be drawne, di∣uided into 32 equall parts, beginning with the Meridian, pas∣sing by the Center of that Circle, the lines drawne from the center of these sections, will be the Rumbes for that place. 9 Of the Geographicall Plaine-Chart wee haue spoken; It behoues vs next to treate of the Geographicall Planispheare. The Planispheare is a table or mappe of two faces, whereon the lines are proiected circularly. Betwixt the Planispheare and the Plaine-Chart, a double dif∣ference may be obserued: 1 That the former consists altogether of right lines, aswell in regard of the Parallells as Meridians: whereas the later is composed of circular or crooked lines, as well as right. 2 The former may well bee expressed in one forme or front, as we may see not only in the Nauticall and com∣mon Chart, which wee haue shewne to be all one with the o∣ther in respect of these Lines; but in many other common Maps, as namely those of Hondius, whereas the Planispheare cannot be expressed without two faces or Hemispheares; whereof the one represents the Easterne, the other the Westerne part of the Terrene Globe: For herein wee must imagine a Globe to be cut into two equall Hemispheares, which are at once represented to our sight: of this Description of the Earth by crooked Lines, Ptolomy in his 24 Chapt. of his Geography hath taught vs two wayes: whereof the first depends from the aspect of a Spheare, turned and moued round, in which all the Meridians are descri∣bed as right Lines; but the Parallels as circumferences or croo∣ked Lines. The other Delineation takes his ground from a Spheare represented to the sight, not moued, but resting still in his place, in which both Meridians and Parallels are drawne cir∣cular. These two wayes of Ptolomy (howsoeuer iudiciously in∣uented in those times, wherein a small part of the Earth was discouered, and Geography very vnperfect) haue beene by later Geographers much reformed and corrected. Yet amongst the later haue not all expressed themselues alike: some haue pour∣trayed out of the Earth in fashion of a Heart; some according to other figures: but in this (perhaps) as Painters, they haue beene more iudulgent to fancy, then common vse: others haue gone a∣bout to expresse the Globe of the Earth in Elipticke Lines, which the Machanicians call ouall. But wee as well in this as other matters, preferring choice before abundance, will con∣tent our selues with one or two, which vse hath stampt more current, and experience hath found most vsefull: to which as a ground we will premise this Theoreme. 1 The Planispheare is grounded on a certaine aspect of the Terrestriall Spheare, wherein the Eye of the beholder is so conceiued to bee fixed in some point of the Globe, that it may see the one halfe or Hemispheare. Concerning the position of the Eye, two things are here re∣markable: 1 Where the Eye is supposed to bee placed either aboue the conuexe superficies, or in the concaue: some seeme to place it aboue the conuexe superficies; of which opinion Gemma Frisius seemes to be, who would haue the Eye to be set at an infinite distance: others although not admitting of such an infinite distance, deny not the Eye to bee aboue the conuexe superficies: but neither way can be warranted: Not the former, because of the impossibility of the supposition. For to imagine the Eye to bee set at an infinite distance, were to deny a sight or aspect which they would haue to bee the ground of this proje∣ction: For no object can bee perceiued, but such as is bounded and determined in a certaine and proportionate space. Neither can the later way passe cleere without exception; because to such a projection, such a sight is required which can see the whole Hemispheare: for otherwise would it be vnperfect, and want of the perfection of the Globe: which containes two ab∣solute and entire Hemispheares. But now no place can be ima∣gined without the Globe, wherein the Eye can be so placed, as to see the one halfe or Hemispheare: for as much as it is impos∣sible from the opposite points of any Diameter, to draw two tangent lines which may meet together, or cut one the other in the same point, but will bee Parallell the one to the other: wherefore wee may conclude, that the Eye in this projection cannot be imagined without the conuexe surface of the Spheare, but rather in the concaue: How the Eye should bee imagined to be in the concaue superficies, may be in this sort explayned: wee must suppose a great Spheare of the Glasse, or other such Diapha∣nous matter, inscribed with all his Parallels and Meridians, in such sort as they are represented vnto vs in the Globe, the Eye (according to opticall Principles) may bee so placed neere the Center of it, as it shall bee able to see precisely the one Hemi∣spheare described with al his circles, as we find it in the spheare. I say neere not in the Center: because the Angle of vision (as we finde it taught in the Perspectiues ) doth not extend to a right Angle, but is somewhat lesse: 2 we must inquire in what point in the superficies the eye is placed. To which wee answer, that the place of the eye is of it selfe indifferent; because it may bee imagined any where in what point soeuer. Neuerthelesse wee will only fasten on two especiall wayes which are of most vse, wherein the propositions following shall informe vs. 9 This Planispheare is twofold: the first we tearme equinoctiall, which supposeth the eye to be fixed on some point of the equi∣noctiall circle; the other Polar, wherein the sight is conceiued to bee fixed on the Pole of the Terrestiall Globe: The ground and fabricke of the former is taught in these Propositions. 1 The eye conceiued to be fixed on any point of the equatour, will designe out vnto vs a Pla∣nispheare wherein all the circles are proiected circularly, except the Equator and that Me∣ridian which passeth by the said point. This may easily bee shewne out of the Opticke principles, we will suppose for example sake the eye to bee placed in some point of the Equatour: which shall bee 90 degrees of longitude from the Equinoctiall point: which kinde of proiection wee haue in many of our common Geographicall Maps of the earth. In this manner of sight, if the terrestriall Hemispheare, which may only be comprehended by it, be distinguished by this Paral∣lells and Meridians ordered and ranged by distances of equall Arches in such number as we please: It is most certaine that the Eye, seeing distinctly and separatly euery one of these Meridi∣ans and Parallels, will forme to it selfe so many visuall Pyra∣mides, called by Geometricians Cones, which cones by this meanes will be Scalenes, and will haue for their Bases those Me∣ridians and Parallels, the tops whereof will meet together in the same point and eye of the beholder, which according to this supposition is the Pole of the Meridian, which passeth by the Canaries, called the first Meridian, and representing vnto vs the Equinoctiall colure. Now because these lines are ut by the plaine of the Meridian passing by the Canaries, it followes out of the same grounds, that their common sections, and that of the Meridian are the proportions of circumferences, which repre∣sent vnto vs in this Plaine the Meridians and Parallels seene in this manner of sight. Notwithstanding that which is vnder the 90 degree of longitude, as likewise the Equatour, cannot (according to Opticke demonstration) be seene, but as right lines cutting one the other at Right Angles in the Center of the same Meridian of the Canaries: The Theory being expressed we will in the next proposition shew the manner of proiection. 2 How to describe the Meridians and Parallels in the Equinoctiall Planispheare. To shew the practise of this Theoreme, let there be drawne a circle ACBD, as you see in this figure diuided by two Dia∣meters cutting on the other at right Angles in the Center into foure Quadrants, or equall parts: whereof each one is againe to bee diuided into 90 degrees. In this the line AB is imagined to expresse the halfe of the Equatour, as the line CD of the Meri∣dian; in which the two points C and D designe out the two Poles. Let a rule bee drawne from the Pole C by euery tenth or fift degrees of the halfe circle ADB, and let euery section of the Equatour and the rule be precisely noted. In like sort from the point B let the Rule bee moued by euery fift and tenth De∣gree of the semicircle CAD, and let euery seuerall Interfection of the rule and the Meridian CD bee precisely noted. Then pla∣cing one foot of the compasse in the line CD (which must bee drawne out longer, because in it the Centers of the Parallels must be found out) let the other be moued in order to euery in∣tersection of the Meridian noted out: and let so many circles be drawne as intersections, which circles will bee so many Paral∣lels. The finding out of the Centers where the stedfast foot of the compasse ought to bee fixed in drawing of each circle, is a matter appertaining to Geometricians: who haue taught a way to bring any three points giuen into a circle, and to finde the Center from which it is described. Hauing thus described the Parallels, wee must proceed on to draw the Meridians in this manuer: let the one foot of the compasse bee placed in the line AB, from which as the Center by euery Intersection of the rule, and the Equatour forenoted, let there bee drawne so ma∣ny circles as intersections; which circles so drawne will be the Meridians. If any man desire more curiously to bee informed in the Geometricall Demonstrations, whereon this Fabricke of the Planispheare is grounded, let him read Gemma Fri∣sius de Astrolabio, Stifelius : but especially Guido Vbaldus, who hath copiously and accuratly handled this subiect. Enough it may seeme for a Cosmographer to shew the vse of it, as wee shall hereafter in Geographicall conclusions, supposing the Fa∣bricke sufficiently demonstrated by Geometricians, to whom it of right belongs. 10 The ground and Fabricke of the Polar Planispheare, is taught in these Propo∣sitions. 1 The Eye conceiued to be fixed on the Pole will expresse in the plaine of the Equino∣ctiall a Planispheare, wherein all the Pa∣rallels are described by circles and Meri∣dians by right lines. This may likewise be optically demonstrated: For the Eye be∣ing supposed to bee fixed on the Pole, the sight will forme to it selfe so many visuall Cones as there are Parallels described in the Spheare. These cones being supposed equally to be cut by the plaine of the Equatour, will haue for their Bases the said Paral∣lell circles represented in the plaine of the Equatour, as so many absolute circles; whereof the Equatour will be the greatest, and comprehending within it all the rest. Likewise the Meridians in this kinde of sight are supposed to terminate the sides of these Cones, and therefore according to the Opticks ought to be right lines. 2 How to describe the Parallels and Meridians in the Polar Planispheare. This proiection is easiest of all, as shall appeare by this Dia∣gram. Let there be described a circle from the Center E which shall be ACBD: Let the circle be by two Diameters AB and BC diuided into foure quadrants: each of which may againe bee diuided into 90 parts: euery fift or tenth of these 90 parts being first marked out, so many Diameters may bee drawne from either side to the opposite part by the Center E: which Diameters so drawne will serue for the Meridians. Then let a∣ny one of these lines bee diuided into 9 parts, and diligently marked out, as the Semidiameter ED by FGHIKLMN: by all which marks from the Center E, let there be drawne so ma∣ny circles. These circles so described will be the true Parallels: This kinde of proiection, though more vnusuall, yet wants not his speciall vse in describing the parts of the earth neere the Pole, which in our ordinary kinde of Tables proiected after the other manner, cannot suffer so large and proportionall a Des∣cription. 11 Hauing hitherto treated of the Common re∣presentation of the Terrestriall Globe, we are in the next place to speake something of the Magneticall. The Magneticall is a round Magnet called a Terrella. This kind of spheare hath been by Gilbert aptly termed a Ter∣rella, or little Earth, being the modell and representation of the great and massie Spheare of the earth whereon wee dwell. Be∣twixt this kind of representation & the former, great difference may bee obserued. First because the former is grounded merely on Artificiall Imitation, implying nothing else but a Respect or application: whereas this magneticall Terrella not only repre∣sents externally the Earth, but Internally out of its owne Mag∣neticall nature and vigour, eminently containes and expresses all those motions and magneticall vertues, which we haue former∣ly shewed to bee in the Earth. 2 It skills not in the former of what Materiall substance the Spheare consists, so the parts of it answer in due symmetry and proportion to the parts of the Earth; but this represents the whole as a Homogeneall part com∣municating the same nature & substance with the whole spheare of the earth: In the Fabricke of this instrument wee must consi∣der, 1 the Matter: 2 the Forme: The matter (as wee haue already intimated) is a Magneticall substance which ought to be chosen out of a most eminent Mine, hauing all his parts pure and vnmixt, as possible wee can finde in any Magnet. For though all Loadstones haue the same inclination, yet in many the vigour is so weake, or at least so hindered by the mixture of some Hetero∣geneall matter, that they will not so well and sensibly performe their office. The forme of it is the roundnesse & politure, wherin Art should shew as much exactnesse as shee can: such a Spheare may well be expressed in this Figure, whereof we had formerly occasion to make vse: wherein the footsteps of this Magneticall vigour are sensibly expressed, no otherwise then in the great Body of the Earth. 12 In this Magneticall Terrella two things are chiefly to bee noted, 1 the inuention of the Poles, 2 of the Parallels & Meridians : both which shall be taught in these Propositions. 1 To finde out the Poles in the Magneticall Terrella. To performe this conclusion many artificiall wayes haue been inuented, 1 By the Inclinatory Needle: for being euenly hung in such sort vpon the Terrella, as may be seene in the former figure it will according to diuers points diuersly respect the Terrella in his site: wheresoeuer then wee shall finde it to fall perpendi∣cularly as right angles, wee may assure our selues that that very point is the Pole: which being once knowne, it will be easie to finde the opposite Pole, either the same way, or by measuring. 2 By the Veyne or Mine of the Loadstone: for (as wee haue shewed in our fourth Chapter of this Treatise) that part which was situated towards the North, will afterwards direct it selfe Southward, and contrariwise, the South point will respect the North, whence the Poles may be discouered. 3 By a little boat, wherein the Loadstone being placed on the water, will moue round till such time as with one Pole hee may point out the North, with the other the South. Many other wayes may be in∣uented by Mechanicians, perhaps more curious, to whose indu∣stry I referre my ingenious Reader. 2 The circles in the Terrella are found out by the Magneticall Needle. This needs no other ocular demonstration then we haue taught in the fourth Chapter, and may be conceaued in the former Dia∣gramme; First wee see the magneticall needle according to di∣uerse points diuersly to conforme it selfe, which hath giuen way to ingenious artificers to finde out the Parallels and Meridians. The Parallels are found out by obseruing the Angles of declina∣tion of the Needle hung ouer the Terrella which are found in proportion to answer to the degrees of Latitude; which D r Rid∣ley in his Magneticall Treatise hath industriously calculated, as I haue here inserted, to saue others a new labour of calcula∣tion. The Meridians are more easily found by hanging any dire∣ctory wier or needle ouer the Terrella; one end of which poin∣ting towards the North, and the other towards the South, will discouer the Meridian line. CHAP. VIII. Of the measure of the Terrestriall Globe. 1 HItherto haue we handled the Terrestriall Globe primarily: in such proprieties as absolutely agree vnto its nature. In the second place we are to handle such as secondarily a∣rise out of the former. Here wee are to handle two chiefe points. 1 The Measure. 2 The Di∣stinction. 2 The measure is that by which we find out the quantity of the whole Earth. Good reason haue we to cal this the Secondary part of Geography ; for as much as these accidents and proprieties we here consider, arise altogether out of the former. In the former Treatise wee haue diuided the Naturall Spheare of the Earth, from the Ar∣tificiall: But in this part, for auoiding of tedious repetitions of the same things, wee haue ioyned them together: For howso∣euer the measuring and dictinctions of the Earth bee truely grounded on the nature of the earth it selfe; yet can it not be well expressed and taught without the materiall Instrument: we haue therefore thought good to consider the measure of the earth, be∣fore wee come vnto the Distinction, because it is more simple and vncompound, depending on the lineaments and measure of one circle: whereas the Distinction necessarily requires the coniunction and combination of diuerse circles, as Meridians and Parallels compared one with the other, as shall bee taught hereafter. Whether the great masse of the earth can bee mea∣sured, or no, seemes a matter not agreed on by all; Some haue held an opinion that it cannot bee measured, in regard of the infinite magnitude wherewith they thought it endowed: which opinion seemes deriued from some of the Platonicks, who ascribing to the Earth another figure besides the Sphericall, haue cast themselues vpon vncertainties, and being notable to reduce the Quantity of the Earth according to their owne grounds to a∣ny certaine measure, haue denied it to bee measurable: But the ground of this opinion wee haue taken away before, in prouing the earth to be of a true Sphericall nature and therefore circum∣scribed in certaine bounds apt to be measured. Another conceit more absurd then the former, is not only the common people, whose condition might excuse their ignorance, but of such as would bee esteemed learned▪ who contend, that the greatnesse of the earth cannot bee measured: the onely reasons they can al∣leadge for themselues are, 1 That a great part of the earth is vn∣accessible by reason of steepe rocks, high mountaines, spacious and thicke woods, moorish fogges, and such like impediments. 2 That the parts of it are for the most part vneuen, and subiect to no regular figure, without the which no measure can bee exact. The first cauill is of no moment; because whereas wee affirme that the Earth by man may be measured, we hold it not necessa∣ry that it should be trauersed ouer by iourneyes or voyages. For as much as to the finding out of the Quantity of the whole Ter∣restriall Spheare, it may seeme sufficient to know the measure and proportion of any little part in respect of the Heauens. As for example, what number of Miles, Leagues, or Furlongs ans∣wer to any degree or degrees in the Heauens: wherfore we sup∣pose the Earth to be measured ouer not with our feet, but with our wits, which may by Mathematicall rules be taught to march forward where our legges fayle vs: The second obiection only proues thus much, that the Earth partaking of so many vnequall parts and irregular formes, cannot in the measuring admit of so much exactnesse, as if it were endowed with one vniforme face: yet it is exact enough to contenta Cosmographer, who measureth not by feet and inches, but by leagues and miles, in which wee little regard such a needlesse curiosity. 1▪ The common measure by which the quantity of the Earth is knowne, are Miles and Furlongs. Here is to be noted that such instruments as serue for measu∣ring are of two sorts, either greater or lesser; the smaller are of diuerse sorts, as a Graine, Inch, Foot, Pearch, Pole, and such like Some of these howsoeuer sometime vsefull in Topographie, can haue little or no vse at all in the vast greatnesse of the whole Earth. Wherefore the Geographer seldome descends so low, but takes notice of greater measures, such as are Miles & Furlongs: where we may obserue by the way, that the vsuall measuring a∣mongst the Grecians was by Stadia or furlongs, amongst many of the Latines by miles: vnder which we also cōprehend Leagues : these miles are diuersly varied, according to the diuersity of Countries, so that in some places they are esteemed longer, in other shorter: which differences may be learned out of this en∣suing Table. The instru∣ments of measuring the Earth are 1 Furlong containing 125 Geometicall paces or 625 feet. 2 Mile which is either 1 Proper containing 8 Furlongs or 1000 paces. 2 Impro∣per, which is either 1 League, which is either 2 German mile which is either the 1 Old, containing 12 Fur∣longs. 2 Newer containing 16 Furlongs. 3 Common of 24 Fur∣longs. 1 Common, which is 32 Furlongs or foure Ita∣lian miles. 2 Greatest, containing 5000 paces which is called the Suenian, or Heluetian mile. Howsoeuer this Distinction of miles may be many wayes profi∣table especially in the Topographicall part, yet shall wee sel∣dome make vse of any other then the common Germane mile, or the common Italian mile: To which as the most knowne, the rest may easily be reduced. 3 The obiect here proposed to bee measured is the Spheare of the Earth. The Dimensions ac∣cording to which it is measured, are either Simple or Compound. 4 The simple is twofold, either the Perimeter, or the Diameter. The Perimeter otherwise called the circumference, is a great circle measuring the Earth round about. 5 The Inuention of the Perimeter of the Earth de∣pends on these following Propositions. 1 If two or more circles bee drawne about the same Center, and from the Center to the Circum∣ference be drawne two right lines; The Arches of all the Circles comprehended within the said right lines will bee like and proportionall one to the other. This Proposition being meerely Geometricall, is taken here as a ground without farther demonstration: whereof if any man doubt, hee may haue recourse to Clauius Commentaries vpon Iohannes de Sacrobosco. This principle granted will beget these two Consectaries. 1 As one degree is to the number of correspondent miles, or furlongs, so all degrees of the circles to the number of miles or Furlongs measuring the quantity of the Perimeter of the Earth. 2 Wherefore one degree or portion of the Cir∣cle being knowne by his number of miles or fur∣longs, the whole Circumference may be found out. The reason of this consequence euery Arithmetician can ea∣sily shew out of the Golden Rule: The chiefe point then of the inuention consists in finding out the proportion of any proporti∣on, as a degree, halfe degree, or the like, to the number of miles or Furlongs answerable thereunto; for which purpose many skilfull Mathematicians haue inuented many excellent wayes of great vse and delight. 1 By the eleuation of the Pole, or obseruation of an Eclipse, or some knowne Starre, the circuit of the Earth may be found out. By the Eleuation of the Pole it is performed after this manner▪ let there be obserued two Cities, or other notable Land-marks placed iust North and South vnder the same Meridian. In these two Citties, or markes, let the Eleuation of the Pole be exactly noted. Then substract the Eleuation of the Southerne Cittie which is lesser, out of the Northerne▪ which is greater: the re∣sidue containes the distance of these places in degrees; which being experimentally knowne by Miles, Halfe-miles, Furlongs or such like measures, will shew the true proportion betwixt a degree, and his number of miles: which being againe multi∣plied by 360, will shew the whole circumference of the Earth. For example sake, wee will take two famous Cities of England, Oxford and Yorke ; which are situated, if not exactly, yet very neere the same Meridian. The eleuation of the Pole here with vs at Oxford is 51 degrees and 30 minutes; at Yorke it is 54 de∣grees 30 minutes, or neere there about: subtract the lesser from the greater, the distance betwixt Oxford and Yorke will bee three degrees; which distance experimentally knowne in miles, will shew the proportion: which wee shall finde to bee, (abating somewhat in regard of the crookednesse of the way) about 180, answering to three degrees of the Meridian: wherefore to one degree will answer 60 Miles, which being multiplied by 360, the whole circle will produce 21600, the measure of the whole Earth. The like may bee performed by an Eclipse in two Citties lying vnder the Equinoctiall circle: two land-markes being once noted out, lying vnder the Equino∣ctiall, let there bee obserued in both the same Eclipse of the Moone, especially in the beginning: Now it being certainely found out how many houres the Eclipse beganne in the one place before the other, wee must resolue their houres into de∣grees, which is easily done: for as much as to euery houre an∣sweres 15 degrees in the Sunne Diurnall motion, according to Astronomers. Now the distance betweene these two Citties or markes (being supposed first experimentally to be knowne, will easily shew the correspondency betwixt the Degrees and miles, which is here sought. Another way is taught by Possido∣nius, as easie as the former, which is performed by some noted fixt Starre, as Oculus Tauri, Arcturus, Spica Virginis, or any other; let there bee obserued vnder the same Meridian in the Earth two places, whose distance is experimentally knowne: in both these places let the Meridian altitude of the Starre be ful∣ly and perfectly obserued: The difference of these two Altitudes will bee the number of degrees betwixt these two places: whence we may obserue how many miles, or other partsanswer to the number of these degrees betwixt these two places. This way by Clauius is preferred before the former; for as much as it requires not in any place the knowledge of the Eleuation of the Pole, which in any place cannot be certainely knowne, with∣out long and diligent search, and obseruation: As for Geogra∣phicall Tables, they are not alwayes at all times to be had, at least worthy credit. 2 By the obseruation of the Noone-shadowes the measure of the Earth may be found out. This way was inuented by Eratosthenes a famous Mathemati∣cian: who by obseruation of the Noone-shadowes, obserued at the same time at two diuerse places, situate vnder the same Meridian, found out the circumference of the Earth. The pla∣ces which he chose for this purpose were Siene, and Alexan∣dria, situated vnder the same Meridian: the one inclining to the South, the other to the North. The Distance betwixt these two places is supposed to be knowne, whence hee proceeded in this manner: First he erected a Gnomon at right Angles on the plaine of the Horizon: when the Sunne was in the beginning of Cancer called the Solstice, from which he imagined two Rayes or Beames to be cast at Noone: the one passing by Siene the most Southerne part, the other by Alexandria the most Northerne: so that at Siene, the Sun being then in the Solstice passed into the Center of the world; the place being supposed to haue beene situate vnder the Tropicke: The other passed by the Vertex of the said Gnomon: whence by proportion of the shadow to the Gnomon by a Geo∣metricall kinde of working he found out the place betweene A∣lexandria, and Siene : which demonstration, formoreeuidence wee will here set downe: Let there bee in the Earth described a circle passing by Alexandria and Siene ; in which let A bee the place where Alexandria stands: B the place of Siene : the Gnomon or Style erected at Alexandria, AD, The Sun-beame carried to the Center of the world at Siena FBC, The Sunne-beame passing by the Ver∣tex, or toppe of the Gnomon seated at Alexandria EDG, casting his shadow AG toward the North: let the Gnomon be conceaued to bee prolonged vn∣to the Center C: Now for as much as in the Triangle ADG, the Arch AG, without any sen∣sible difference may bee taken for a Right line, hauing an insen∣sible magnitude in regard of the whole Earth: and the Angle A is a right angle, and the two sides AD, and AG knowne: the former by supposition, being a Gnomon taken at our pleasure; the latter by any measure, or at least by the knowne proportion of the shadow to the Gnomon, according to the Doctrine of Tri∣angles: the Angle ADG will bee knowne; For whereas the sides AD, and AG are supposed to be knowne, their Quadrants also will be knowne, which being equall to the square made of DG, by the 47 proposition of the 1 of Euclide, the right side DG will easily be knowne: out of these grounds by the doctrine of the Sines and Tangents is easily found out the Angle ADG, and by consequence the alternate Angle ACB, which by the 27 of the first of Euclide is equall vnto it: for as much as the two Radii FBC and FDG may be supposed to bee Parallels in so small a distance as Alexandria & Siene compared with the Sun: the Angle being knowne the Arch AB subtended to the Angle C, will also be knowne, which is the space intercepted betwixt Siene and Alexandria ; and for example sake: if Eratosthenes (as some write) found out the Arch AB, to containe in degrees 85, and experience had taught the length of the Iourney betwixt these Citties to haue contained 6183 ½ Furlongs: It would ap∣peare by the Golden Rule that 360 degrees containing the whole circuit of the Earth must proportionally answer to 252000 Fur∣longs. 1 The opinions of Cosmographers concerning the measure of the Earth, are diuerse: which is chiefely to be imputed to their errour in obser∣uing the distances of places experimentally according to Miles, Furlongs, or such like measures. How many Authors of great name and estimation haue diffe∣red amongst themselues, euery man may enforme himselfe out of this Table here inserted. These differences wee finde diuersly related: but of all others, which Authors haue set forth, Authors Furlongs Miles. Strabo and Hipparchus 252000 31500 Eratos∣thenes. 250000 31250 The circuit of the whole earth con∣taines accor∣ding to Possidonius & the anciēt Arabians. 240000 30000 Ptolomie. 180000 22500 The later Arabians 204000 25500 Italians and Germans. 172800 21600 I preferre the iudgements of M r Robert Hues ; For as much as it is not grounded on common tradition, but industriously by himselfe deriued out of the Ancients by diligent search and ex∣amination, as by one, whose iudgement being armed as well with skill in the language, as the knowledge of antiquity, scornes to be iniured by translation. What should bee the cause of these differences, is a matter which hath staggered curious searchers into Antiquities more then the former. Euery opini∣on being supported with the names and authorities of such re∣nowned Authors, might challenge a pitch aboue the measure of my Decision: only I may not bee thought ouer presumptu∣ous to coniecture where I cannot define, especially hauing so good a guide as my forenamed Author, to tread out the way before mee. Wherefore supposing as a ground, these Authors so much differing about the measure of the earth, to haue beene in some sort led by reason. The differences must needs arise out of one of these causes: either the errour or negligence of the ob∣seruers, in trusting too much to others relations without any farther search, or else the defect in the Mathematicall grounds out of which they deriued their demonstration; or the diuersi∣ty of measures vsed in this worke: or finally, from the misap∣plication of these measures to the distances; whence may arise some errour out of the experimentall measuring of places in the earth. In the first place it may perhaps be doubted whether A∣ristotle defining the measure of the Earth to bee 400000 fur∣longs, were not deceaued by relations: for as much as hee auou∣cheth it, from the Mathematicians of his times, whose authori∣ty and credit for ought wee know, deserues as well to bee for∣gotten as their names. But this answer might seeme too sharp in the other: for as much as wee find them registred for Masters in their science, and such as could not easily bee cosened by o∣thers impostures. Neither can wee imagine the second to bee any cause of their errour for the same reason: because the wayes these Mathematicians vsed in finding out the circuit of the earth, are by writers of good credit commended to posterity, as warrantably grounded on certaine demonstrations, being no other then what wee haue shewed before, which admit of no Parallogisme: In the third place wee ought to examin whether the diuersity of opinion concerning this matter pro∣ceeded from diuersity of the measures which were vsed in this worke. Nonnius and P ceru would needs perswade, that the Furlongs whereby they measured the earth were not the same: Maurolycus and Xilander talke of diuerse kindes of paces: Maurolycus labours to reconcile both, but without effect. First whereas they would haue diuerse k nde of paces, it cannot be denied: but in the meane time we cannot learne that the Greci∣ans euer measured their Furlongs by Paces, but either by Feet, or Faddomes. A Faddome which the Greeks call is the measure of the extension of the hands together with the breast betwixt, containing six feet: which is a kinde of measuring well knowne vnto our Mariners, in sounding the depth of the Sea. This measure notwithstanding is by many translated a Pace: by what reason, let any man iudge. Xilander in translating Strabo renders it an Ell: Secondly for a Furlong it containes according to Herodoiu an ancient Grecian writer 600 Feet: which is al∣so testified by Suidas, being much later. A Furlong containes 100 Faddomes; euery Faddome foure Cubits. A Cubit, ac∣cording to Heron, a Foot and halfe, or 24 Digits. Now for the variety of Furlongs, it is true that Censorinus makes three kindes. For either it is called the Italian consisting of 625 Feet, which is of most regard in measuring the Earth; or the Olympian of 600 Feet: or the Pythian containing 1000 Feet. But to let passe this latter, we shall finde by serious consideration, that the Italian and Olympian Furlongs differ only in name, and are indeed the same. For the Italian containing 625 Roman Feet (according to Pliny in his second booke) is quall to the Olym∣pian, hauing 600 Grecian Feet. For a Foot with the Grecians exceeds the Roman Foot by a twenty fourth part: as much as is the difference betwixt 600 and 625. Hence wee see how lit∣tle certainty can bee expected of such as goe about to reconcile these opinions out of the various vse and acception of the mea∣sures. The most probable assertion then is, that the errour was grounded on this, that the distances of places, mentioned by the foresaid Authors, were not by themselues exactly measured, but taken vp vpon trust on the relation of trauellers, wherein they might easily bee mistaken. For instance wee will take Era∣tosthenes and Possidonius, as of greatest credit, who are notwith∣standing taxed for many errours in their experimentall obser∣uations: whereas it is cleere that Ptolomy grounded his opinion on the distances of the places, exactly measured, as is witnessed by his designation of the Latitude of the earth so farre as it was discouered and knowne. Eratosthenes, for mistaking in the mea∣sure of distances, is much taxed by Hyparchus, as we find in Stra∣bo : For betwixt Alexandria and Carthage, hee reckons aboue 13 thousand furlongs, whereas by a more diligent enquiry there are found to bee but 9 thousand. Likewise Possidoniu is knowne to bee mistaken, in that hee made the Distance betwixt Rhodes and Alexandria to bee 5000 Furlongs, whereas out of the relation of Marriners, some haue made it 4000, some 5000, as it is witnessed by Eratosthenes in Strabo ; who notwithstan∣ding, sayes that hee found by Instruments that it was not aboue 3750; and Strabo wou d haue it somewhat lesse, as 2640. Mau∣rolycus, going about to defend Possidonius against Ptolomy, brings nothing but friuo ous reasons vnworthy so good an author. Out of all which hath beene spoken our former Corollary will bee manifest, that the diuersity of opinions concerning the circumfe∣rence of the Earth, arose from the experimentall mistake in the distances of places, where they trusted to other mens relations, rather then their owne knowledge. 6 The Diameter is a right line passing by the Cen∣ter of the Earth from one side to the other▪ and measuring the thicknesse of it: the inuention of which depends on these Rules. 1 As 22 is to 7 so is the circumference of a circle to the Diameter: wherefore the circumference of the Earth multiplied by 7, and diuided by 22 will produce the Diameter. The exact proportion betwixt the Circumferences of a circle, & the Diameter being the ground of the Quadrature of a circle, is a matter which hath set a work the greatest wits of the world: hauing notwithstanding as yet by no man been brought to dis∣couery, in so much as Pitiscus, and other good Mathematicians, might well doubt whether euer it would come to light. N uer∣thelesse, where exactnesse cannot bee found, wee must come as neere as we can. The neerest proportion in numbers which any could yet light on, is as 22 to 7, which in so great and massie a bo∣dy, as the Earth may passe without any sensible or explicable er∣rour. Supposing then out of our precedent Suppositions the whole circuit of the earth to bee 21600 Italian -miles (which is the common opinion now receaued) I multiply according to the golden Rule 21600 by 7, whence will arise 151200, which being diuided by 22 the Quotient will render 6872 11/8 which is the Diameter or thicknesse of the Earth: some lesse curious are content to take only the third part of the circumference for the Diameter, which will be 7200, which account is lesse exact, yet sufficient for an ordinary Cosmographer: for as much as 328 miles, which is the difference, is of no great moment in the mea∣sure of the whole Earth. 2 By the knowne height of some mountaine with∣out the knowledge of the circumference of the Earth, the Diameter may be found out. This is a way inuented by Maurolycus, which proceeds in a contrary manner to the former: because the former by the cir∣cumference first supposed to be known, shewes vs a way to find out a Diameter: but this, first seeks out the Diameter, by which wee may finde out the circumfe∣rence: the practise is in this man∣ner. Let the circuit of the Earth be conceaued to be BCD (as we see in this Figure) in which let there be chosen an high Mountain whose Altitude AB may bee knowne by the rules of measu∣ring altitudes: then from the Mountaines top A, by the rules of measuring longitudes must the whole space of Sea or Land bee measured so far as it can be seene: so that the visuall Beame AC, may touch the Superficies of the Earth in C: let the space thē which is seene in the Earth be BC, which although in it selfe it bee crooked and not plaine, yet can it not sensibly differ from a Plaine, for as much as the Arch BC, is ex∣traordinarily little, if compared with the whole Earth. These grounds thus laid, we must proceed by a Geometricall manner of argumentation in this sort, Here are to bee obserued foure right lines: whereof the first is AB, the heigth of the mountaine obserued: the second is the visuall Ray AC: the third AD con∣sisting of the height of the mountaine, and the Diameter of the Earth. The fourth BC, the distance which is seene: for (as wee haue shewed) it may without sensible errour bee taken for a right line. Now for as much as AB, BC are knowne, their Qua∣drates by the 47 proposition of the first of Euclide, will also bee knowne, which being equall to the square of AC, the square of the right line AC will likewise bee knowne. But the square of the right line AC, sith it toucheth the circle, will be equall to a Right Angle Figure contained vnder DA, AB, wherefore the right angle so conceaued will be knowne. But AB is the knowne heigth of the mountaine, wherefore the right line AD will easily be knowne; if wee diuide the knowne right Angle contained vnder AB, AD: by the right line AB: for the Quo∣tient will giue the right line AD; from which if wee subduct AB, the knowne height of the mountaine: then will remaine the Diameter of the Earth BD, which was here to be perfor∣med: from this inuention will arise this Corollary. 1 The Diameter of the Earth first supposed to be knowne, the circumference may be found out in this manner: as 7 is in proportion to 22, so is the Diameter to the Circumference. 2 Wherefore let the knowne number of the Diame∣ter be multiplied by 22, and the Product be di∣uided by 7, the quotient will giue the Circum∣ference. As for example according to our former instance: Let vs sup∣pose the Diameter of the Earth to bee 6872 8/11 this number being multiplied by 22, will produce 15120, which product diuided by 7, wee shall finde in the Quotient 21600, which is the circumference of the Earth. 7 The compound dimensions, according to which the Spheare of the Earth is proposed to bee measured, are either the Superficies or the Solidity. 8 The Superficies is againe twofold, either Plaine or Conuexe : the Plaine is the space in∣cluded in the Perimeter. 9 The plaine Superficies may be found out two wayes: either by the Circumference, or the Diameter: both which wayes taught in these Rules. 1 If the whole circumference bee multiplied in it selfe, and the product bee diuided by 12 4/7 the quo∣tient will shew the Superficies included in the circle. As in the former example wee will take the Circumference of the Earth to be 21600 Italian -miles: let this number be multi∣plied in it selfe, and the product thereof diuided by 12 4/7, the Quotient will amount vnto 9278180, which is the plaine su∣perficies of the Earth. 2 If the Semi-Diameter of a circle be multiplied by the halfe part of the Circumference : there will arise the measure of the Plaine Superficies contained in the Circumference. The reason hereof is shewed by Clauius in his Tract de Isoperi∣metris Proposit. 4. where is demonstrated, that a Right Angle figure comprehended of the Semi-Diameter of any circle, and the halfe of the Circumference will be equall to the Circle it selfe, of whose parts it is comprehended. 10 So much concerning the Plaine Superficies: the knowledge and inuention of the Conuexe, may bee performed two wayes: either by the Diameter and Circumference ; or else by the Space contained within the Circumference, accor∣ding to these Propositions. 1 If the Circumference and Diameter be multiplied the one into the other, the product will shew the number of square miles in the face of the Terre∣striall Globe. As for example, let the Diameter of the Earth containing ac∣cording to the common account 80111 9/12 furlongs, bee multi∣plied by the whole circumference, which is 252000, there will arise the Conuexe Superficies of the whole earthly Spheare which is 20205818181 9/11. 2 If the space contained in the greatest circle in the Spheare bee multiplied by 4, there will bee produced the whole conuexe Superficies of the Spheare. How to finde out the space or plaine Superficies, is a matter taught before: which being once found is easily multiplied by 4, and so will giue vs the number sought. 11 The last and greatest compound Dimen∣sion, according to which the Earth is mea∣sured, is the Solidity, consisting of Length, Bredth, and Height, or Thicknesse: This may bee found out two wayes either by the Diame∣ter, and Conuexe Superficies, first supposed to be known: or by the knowledge of a great circle without supposing the Supperficies to be first knowne: both wayes shall bee expressed in these Propositions. 1 If the Semidiameter of the Spheare be multiplied into the third part of the Conuex Superficies of the said Spheare, there will arise the whole Soli∣dity of the Earth. This is demonstrated by Geometricians: For a solide Rectangle comprehēded of the Semidiameter of the Spheare, and the third of the Cōuex Superficies of it, will be equall to the Spheare it selfe. As for example, if the Semidiameter of the earth contai∣ning 40090 10/11 Furlongs bee multiplied by the third part of the Conuex Superficies containing, to wit, 67352727 3/11 there will arise the solidity of the earth, which will containe 27002-3:06611570 3/11 Cubicke Furlongs. That is the solidity of the earth will comprehend so many Cubes, cantaining euery side so many Furlongs, as there are vnities in the said number: For the Areae or spaces comprehended of Solide figures are measured by the Cubes of those lines, by whose squares the Conuexe Su∣perficies of those lines are measured. 2 If the greatest circle bee multiplied by ⅔ of the whole Diameter: the product will shew the soli∣dity of the Spheare. This way is also demonstrated by Clauius in the same tract of measuring Magnitudes. It may Arithmetically bee deduced in this sort. If any Spheare whatsoeuer hath a Diameter of 14 Palmes, and should bee multiplied by 3 1/7, the circumference of the greatest circle containing it will be found to be 44; whose halfe being 22, if it be multiplied into the Semidiameter 7, there will arise the Superficies of the greatest circle 154, which num∣ber if wee multiply by two third parts of the Diameter: that is by 9⅓ there will bee produced the solidity of the said Spheare, to wit, consisting of 1437 ⅔ Cubicke palmes. In the like sort may wee worke by miles or furlongs in measuring the whole terre∣striall Globe, which is a more conuenient measure for the massie Globe of the Earth. CHAP. IX. Of the Zones, Climates, and Parallels. 1 OF the Measure of the Earth we haue trea∣ted in our former Chapter. In the next place wee must speake of the Distinction of the Terrestriall Spheare, which is either in re∣gard of Spaces or Distances. 2 Spaces are portions in the Spheare bounded by the Parallell circles: such as are the Zones, Climats, and Parallels. 3 These are againe considered two wayes; either in themselues, or else in their Adiuncts or Inhabitants belonging to them. 4 A Zone is a space included betwixt two lesser and named circles; or else betwixt a les∣ser circle and the Pole of the world. The spaces into which the Terrestriall Spheare is diuided, are either Greater or Lesser. The Greater is a Hemispheare which ariseth out of one only circle by it selfe, without the Combinati∣on of more. Such are chiefly of three sorts. The first is made by the Equatour: which diuides the whole Globe into the north and the South Hemispheare. The second is of the Meridian, whose office it is to part the Earth into the Easterne and We∣sterne Hemispheares: The third of the Horizon, which diuides the Spheare into the vpper and lower halfes: But these parts arising (as I said) out of one only circle, are handled before with the circles themselues. In this place wee are to speake of such parts, as arise out of the Combination and respect of circles one with another. Such as are the Zones, Climats, and Parallels. A Zone signifies as much as a girdle or band: because by it the spaces in the Earth are (as it were) with larger bands compas∣sed about. The Grecians haue sometimes giuen this name Zone to the Orbs of the Planets, as Theon, Alexandrinus in his Com∣ment on Aratus, in these words, . There are (saith he) in the Heauens seauen Zones not con∣torminate with the Zodiacke, whereof the first is possessed by Sa∣turne, the second by Iupiter, &c. But this acception of the name is far off from our purpose. The name, Zone, as it is with vs in vse, is by the Latine Poëts rendred sometimes Facia, some∣times Plaga: both signifying one and the selfe-same thing: which is as much as a space comprehended within two Named and lesser Parallels: or at least betwixt such a Parallell and the Pole it selfe: because, as wee shall shew hereafter Zones are of two sorts: These Zones are in number fiue; which diuision hath beene familiar with our Latine Poëts, as may appeare by these verses of Virgil. Quin{que} tenent coelum Zonae, quarum vna corusco▪ Semper Sole rubens▪ & torrida semper ab Igne: Quam circum extremae dextrâ laeuá{que} trahuntur. Caerule â glacie concretae, at{que} imbribus atris. Has inter, Mediam{que}, duae Mortalibus aegris Munere concessae Diuûm, &c. Fiue Zones ingirt the Skies; whereof one fries With fiery Sun-beames, and all scorched lies. 'Bout which the farthest off on either hand, The blew-eyed Ice and brackish showres command. 'Twixt these two and the midst the Gods doe giue A wholsome place for wretched man to liue. Which description of Virgil little differs from that wee finde in Ouid, in these Verses. —Duae dextrâ coelum totidem{que} sinistrâ Parte secant Zonae: quinta est ardentior illis: Sic onus inclusum numero distinxit eodem Cura Dei, totidem{que} Plagae tellure premuntur. Quarum quae Media est non est habitabilis aestu: Nix egit, alta duas: totidem inter vtram{que} locauit. Temperiem{que} dedit mista cum Frigore Flamma. Two Girdles on the right hand, on the left As many cut the Skies: more hot's the fift. So God diuiding with an equall hand, Into so many parcels cuts the land. The midst through heat affords no dwellers Ease: The deepe snow wraps vp two: but betwixt these And the other Regions, are two places set, Where frosts are mixt with fires, and cold with heat. But because this enumeration and description of the Zones set downe by the Poëts, seemes too popular and generall, wee will more specially diuide them according to the methode of our times in this manner. 5 The Zones are either Vntemperate, or Temperate : the Vntemperate are againe twofold either cold or hot. 6 The Intemperate hot Zone is the space con∣tained betwixt the two Tropicke circles of Can∣cer and Capricorne. How vnaptly these names of Temperate & Vntemperate agree to the Zones, considered in their owne nature, wee shall speake in our second part: yet because I thought it vnfit to vse other tearmes then the Ancients, I will not coine new names. This Zone, or space included betwixt the two Tropicks, circum∣scribes within it two great circles, whereof the one is the Equa∣tour running iust in the midst, neither inclining to the North or South: The other is the Eclipticke obliquely crossing it and mee∣ting the two Tropicks twice in a yeere, in the Spring and Au∣tumne. The extent or breadth of this Zone then is equall to the distance betwixt these two Tropicks, to wit, 47 degrees, which make 2820 miles: because from the Equatour to either Tropicke we account 23 degrees, which added and resolued in∣to miles, will make the said summe: within the compasse of this Zone is situate the greatest part of Africke, especially that of the Abyssines (which common opinion with little probabili∣ty, would haue to bee the Empire of Prester Iohn ) also many Ilands as Iaua, Summatra, Taprobana, besides a great part of the South of America called Peruana : It was imagined by the Ancients, as Aristotle, Pliny, Ptolomy, and many other Philo∣sophers, Poëts, and Diuines, that this Zone through extreame heat was altogether vnhabitable: for which cause they called it Intemperate: The reason of this coniecture was drawne from the situation of this part in regard of that of the heauens. For ly∣ing in the middle part of the world, the Sunne must of necessi∣ty cast his rayes perpendicular, that is to say at Right An∣gles. Now according to the grounds of Peripateticke Philoso∣phy the Idol of this age, the heat deriued from the Sunne, ariseth from the reflexion of the Sunne-beames against the sur∣face of the Earth. Wherefore the heat was there coniectured to bee greatest, where the reflexion was found to bee greatest. But the greatest reflexion, according to all Mathematicians, must be in this Torrid Zone, where the Sunne darts forth his Rayes at right Angles, which reflect backe vpon themselues. Which false coniecture was a long time continued by the exuberant des∣criptions of Poëts, and defect of Nauigation: hauing as yet scarce passed her infancy. But how farre these surmises come short of truth, wee shall declare in our second part, to which wee haue reserued those Physicall and Historicall discourses concerning the qualities and properties of the Earth. 7 The Intemperat cold Zones are those which are included betwixt the Polar circles and the Poles: whereof the one is Northerne, contained in the Arcticke circle, the other Southerne in the Antarcticke. These two Zones are not made out of the combination of two circles, as the former: but by one circle with relation to the Pole. The greatnesse and extent of this Zone is about 23 degrees and a halfe: which resolued into Italian -miles will produce 1380. The Northerne cold Zone containes in it Groenland, Fineland, and diuerse other Northerne Regions, whereof some are partly discouered, and set out in our ordinary Maps, other some not yet detected. For the other Zone vnder the Antarticke Pole, it con∣sists of the same greatnesse, as wee know by the constitution of the Globe, hauing other such accidents correspondent as the Northerne, so farre forth as they respect the Heauens. For other matters, they lye hid in the vast Gulph of obscurity, this port ha∣uing neuer yet (for ought I know) exposed her selfe to the disco∣uery of the Christian world. Whether these two Zones be with∣out habitation, by reason of intemperate cold, as the other hath been thought by reason of too much heat, wee shall in due place examine. 8 The Temperate Zone is the space contained betwixt the Tropicke & the Polar circle: where∣of the one is Northerne contained betwixt the Tropicke of Cancer and the Articke circle: the other Southerne comprehended betwixt the Tropicke of Capricorne and the Antarcticke circle. Why these Zones are tearmed Temperate, diuerse reasons are alleaged. 1 Because the Sun-beames here are cast obliquely on the surface of the earth, and by consequence cannot produce so much heat, as in those places where they are darted perpen∣dicularly, if wee only consider the constitution and site of the heauens: For as we shall hereafter proue, this may sometimes be altered by the disposition of some particular place. 2 It may be called the Temperate Zone, because it seemes mixt of both extreames partaking in some measure the both qualities of heat and cold: the one from the Torrid, the other from the Frigid Zones. 3 Because in these Zones the distances betwixt Sum∣mer and Winter are very remarkable, hauing a middle difference of time betwixt them, as compounded of both extreames. These temperate Zones included betwixt the Tropicks and the Polar circles are twofold as the circles: The northerne temperate Zone comprehended of the Tropicke of Cancer and the Articke circle, containes in it the vpper and higher part of Africke, stretching euen to the mountaine Atlas: Moreouer in it is pla∣ced all Europe, euen to the Northerne Ilands in the Articke Zone, and a great part also of Asia : the other temperate Zone lying towards the South, is not so well knowne being farre di∣stant from our habitation: and awaiting as yet the farther indu∣stry of our English and Dutch Nauigators. The bredth of this Zone, as the other containes about 43 degrees which is the di∣stance betwixt the Tropicke and the Polar circle, which multi∣plied by 60, will be resolued into 2580 Italian-miles. 1 The Torrid Zone is the greatest of all: next are the two Temperate Zones: the cold Zones the least of all. The Torrid Zone is found to be greatest as well in regard of longitude as latitude, and is diuided by the Equatour into two halfes: the next are the Temperate; but the two cold Zones howsoeuer equall in Diameter to the Torrid, are notwithstan∣ding least of all: where is to bee noted that euery Zone is of the same latitude from North to South, beginne where we will, be∣cause it is contained betwixt two equidistant circles: but all in∣ioy not the same longitude from East to West, For the parts of euery Zone by how much neerer they are to the Equatour so much greater longitude will they haue: by how much neerer the Poles they are, so much the lesse longitude: for as much as the Parallels towards the Poles grow alwayes lesser and lesser. The inuention of the quantity of the Zones before mentioned, may briefly thus bee performed. The latitude of the torrid Zone is so much as the distance betwixt the Tropickes, which is A∣stronomically grounded on the greatest declination of the Sunne being doubled: This declination being by Clauius and others found to be 23 degrees 30 scrup. which being doubled will pro∣duce 47: which againe multiplied by 60, and resolued into miles, will amount to 2820: though the odde scruples of many Au∣thors are neglected. The latitude of the cold Zones is also drawne from the greatest declination of the Sunne: For the di∣stance of the Pole circles from the Pole it selfe is iust so much as the declination of the Eclipticke from the Equatour, to wit, of 23 degrees 30 scrup. to which answer according to the former Rule 1420 Italian -miles. The inuention of the latitude of the temperate Zones depends from the subtraction of the distance of the Poles of the Eclipticke, from the Equatour: that is from the greatest declination of the Sunne being doubled from the whole quadrant: in which subduction the residue will be 43, to which will answer 2580 Italian-miles. 1 The Zone wherein any place is seated may bee knowne either by the Globe or Geographicall Table, or else by the Tables of Latitude. By the Globe or vniuersall Mappe wee may know it by the diligent obseruation of the foure equidistant circles. For if wee find it betwixt the two Tropicks, we may without doubt, thinke it to be in the Torrid Zone: If betwixt the Tropicke circle and the Polar, it will be in the Temperate. If betwixt the Polar circle and the Pole it selfe, it must bee in the cold Zone. By the Tables of Latitude it may be found this way: Seeke the latitude of the places giuen in the Table, which if it bee lesse then 23 degrees 30 scruples, the place is in the Torrid Zone. If precisely it bee so much in the Northerne Hemispheare, the place assigned is vnder the Tropicke of Cancer, which is the bound betwixt the Torrid and the beginning of the Northerne Temperate Zone: But if it be in the Southerne Hemispheare, it will be vnder the Tropicke of Capricorne: which ends the Torrid Zone, and be∣ginnes the South Temperate Zone: Euery place hauing more Latitude then 23 degrees 30 scruples, yet lesse then 66 degrees 30 Minutes, is seated in the Temperate Zone, either Northerne or Southerne, as the places are in the Hemispheare. If the place be precisely of 66 Degrees 30 minutes, it will be iustly found to be vnder the Polar circle, either Arcticke or Antarcticke. Fi∣nally euery place whose Latitude exceeds the number of 66 de∣grees 30 minutes, is seated in the cold Zone either Southerne or Northerne. If it reach iust to 90 degrees, it will bee iust vnder the Pole it selfe. 9 Of the distinction of the Terrestriall Spheare by Zones we haue spoken: we must in the next place deliuer the Distinction of the earth according to Climates. 10 A Climate is a space of the Earth contained betwixt two Parallels distant from the E∣quatour towards either Pole. Climates are so called because of their Declaration from Equatour ; for as much as they are to bee accounted as so ma∣ny scales of ascents to or from the Equatour. Some haue defi∣ned it from the vse which is chiefly to distinguish the longest time of the Artificiall day: because at the point of euery climate truely taken, the longest day is varied halfe an houre: al∣though this account agree not altogether with Ptolomie, and the ancient Geographers before him, as wee shall shew hereaf∣ter. This distinction of the Terrestriall Spheare into Climates is somewhat a more subtile distinction then the former by Zones; for as much as that is made by the combination of such Parallels as are principally named and of chiefe note, as the Tropicks and Polar circles. But this indifferently respects all without difference. This first beginning and measure, as well of this as all other measures of the earth is the Equatour, for that which is most perfect and absolute in euery kinde ought to be the measure of all other. But yet wee must vnderstand, that although wee beginne our account of the Climats from the Equatour; yet the Equatour it selfe makes no Climate, but on∣ly the Parallels which are thereunto correspondent. For as it is before shewed, vnder the Equatour it selfe, the artificiall dayes are all equall in length, containing only twelue houres: wherefore beginning from the Equatour betwixt that and the third Parallell, wee count the first climate: from the third to the sixt, the second Climate: and so all the rest, making the number of the Climates double to the number of the Parallels; so that one and the selfe same Parallell, which is the end, and bound of one Climate is the beginning of the next; whence wee see that to the constitution of euery Climate three Parallels concurre, whereof two are extreame, comprehending the bredth of the said Climate, and one diuiding it iust in the midst. A Parallell therefore differs from a Climate, as a part from the whole, be∣ing one circle correspondent to the Equatour, whereas a Cli∣mate is a space contained in three Parallels. Secondly, as a Pa∣rallell is conceaued to adde to the artificiall day one quarter or fourth part of an houre; so a Climate makes halfe an houre; so that by how much any Climate is distant from the E∣quatour, by so many halfe houres the longest day of that Climate goes beyond the longest day of the place vnder the Equatour. These Climates therefore cannot bee all of one e∣quall quantity; because the Equatour is a greater circle, and comprehends the greatest space in the Earth: so that it must needs follow that these Climates neere the Equatour being made by the combination of greater circles are greater then those neerer the Poles. But because all Climates are made by the combination of Parallels; wee are to vnderstand that there are three sort of Parallels to bee knowne in Cosmographie: The first are those which doe distinguish the latitude of places, ta∣king their beginning from the Equatour; and are in an ordinary Globe of Mappe distinguished, sometimes by 10, sometimes by 15 degrees. The second kinde of Parallels are those that make the Zones, which are indeed some speciall named Parallels, as the Tropicks and the Polar circles: The third sort are called Ar∣tificiall Parallels; because they shew the distances of artificiall dayes and nights, which are commonly noted in the margent of a Geographicall Mappe, which last sort of Parallels are here chie∣fly to be vnderstood. 1 The Zones and Climates agree in forme but differ in greatnesse, number and office. The Climates are so called (as we haue said) because they de∣cline from the Equatour, and are spaces of the Earth containing two Parallells, in which the longest day is varied by halfe an houre. These agree with the Zones in some sort: for both of them are spread by the latitude of the Earth, and by Parallell circles compasse it about as so many girdles: Ne∣uerthelesse they differ one from the other. 1. In Greatnesse, be∣cause the Zones are greater, the Climates lesser spaces in the Earth. 2. In Number, because there are only fiue Zones, but ma∣ny more climates. 3. In Office, vse and effect, because the Zones are to distinguish the mutation of the quality of the aire and shaddowes according to diuerse Regions of the Earth: but the Climates are vsed to shew the greatest differences of houres in the day: to shew the variation of the rising and setting of the starres, for places vnder the same Climate haue the same quan∣tity of dayes and nights, the same rising and setting of the starres, whereas places seated vnder diuerse climats haue a great vari∣ation in the dayes and nights, and a diuerse rising and setting of the stars: for as often as the longest or Solsticiall day of one place, differs from the longest day of another by the space of halfe an houre, a new Climate is placed: wherefore vnder the Equatour or middle part of the earth the dayes are alwayes equall, to wit, of 12 houres: which beginning from the Equatour, if wee ap∣proach towards either Pole, so far as the greatest artificiall day amounts to 12 ½, we may assure our selues that wee are come to the first Climate: and so forward still the greatest day of our Cli∣mate will by so much exceed the greatest day of the other. As the Climates differ one from the other by halfe houres, so the Parallels by quarters, as we haue shewed: and shall more fully explaine in this Chapter. 2 The Climates compared one with the other, are not all of the same greatnesse. Although the Climates are placed according to equall increase of dayes and nights, yet suffer they a great inequality: For no clime is equall to another in the same Hemispheare, but are still greater then other, by how much neerer they are to the Equino∣ctiall circle; for the latitude of the first Climate is reckned to be about 8 degrees, which make 480 Italian -miles: but of the last not so many minutes as quarters of miles. 11 In Terrestriall Climates, two things are to be vnderstood; 1 The Inuention: 2 The Distin∣ction. The Inuention teacheth the manner how to find out in what Climate any place lieth. The finding out of any climate depends vpon the obseruation of the length of the day; for the length of the day being once known, the Climate will also bee found out by this Rule. 1 Double the houres aboue 12, and the Product will shew the Climate▪ The reason of this rule is intimated before; to wit, that the cli∣mates are distinguished the one from the other by the space of halfe an houre of the longest day: Now the dayes vnder the e∣quatour are alwayes equall, containing 12 houres in length: from which towards the Pole they are increased by degrees: where∣fore the number of the Climates must needs bee double to the number of houres aboue 12: as for example, if I should find out in what Climate England is situated: I find the length of the longest day to be about 18 houres, which is six houres more then 12; this I double, and it will be 12; whence I collect, that Eng∣land is situated vnder the 12 Climate: A more compendious way of finding out the Climate of any place, is by a certaine Table, wherein against euery Eleuation of the Pole is set the iust Climate: which Table we shall insert hereafter. Here must bee noted that this rule which wee haue taught is to bee vnder∣stood of the Climates as they are absolute in nature, and not of Ptolomies Climates: If any man would finde out the Climates of Ptolomie, hee must first cast away three quarters of an houre, which is 45 minutes; because his Climates, as wee shall shew, beginne not immediatly from the Equatour, but from the lati∣tude of 12 degrees. 12 Thus much for the Inuention : the Distinction of Climates in Northerne and Southerne Cli∣mates: both these againe are of two sorts, either proper or improper. 13 The proper Climates are those which are placed between the Equatour and the point neere the Polar circle: The improper are those from the Polar circle to the Pole it selfe. Wee must vnderstand that the climates are considered two manner of wayes, 1 Absolutely in respect of the whole Terre∣striall Spheare. 2 Comparatiuely, in respect of the knowne ha∣bitable part of the Earth: According to the latter consideration the ancient Geographers haue otherwise distinguished the Cli∣mates then the new writers: whence ariseth a great difference and confusion amongst them, in defining the number of the cli∣mates. For sometime they will haue a new climat put whenso∣euer the day increaseth a quarter of an houre: sometimes at halfe an houre, sometimes at difference of an whole houre or day. But the doubt is easily answered, and reconciled by our former di∣stinction; for whereas they put the difference of climates to be halfe an houre, it is to be vnderstood of these which are pro∣per climates betwixt the Equatour and the Polar circle, for it is certaine that beyond this circle the artificiall day increa∣seth, not only by houres, but by dayes, weeks, months; so that another account must bee made of such climats then of the former. But it hath been generally taken for those climates of the Ancients: now the distinction of climates amongst the An∣cients is of two sorts. The first was of the Geographers before Ptolomy who placed the vttermost bound Northward in the 25 th degree of Latitude or Eleuation, and so made only seuen climates. These 7 climates were all vnderstood to bee in the habitable parts wherein they were marked and designed out vnto vs by names taken from Citties, Mountaines, Regions, and such like remarkable places, where we are to conceaue that cli∣mate as neere as may bee guessed to runne through the middle of any such Region, whereof it taketh its name: But the better to vnderstand the Distinction of the climates, as well with the Ancient as Moderne Cosmographers, we will insert this follow∣ing Theorem. 1 In the placing and Number of the Climates and Parallels, there is a great diuersity be∣twixt the Ancient and Moderne Geogra∣phers. This hath been before mentioned: but for better distinction we haue reserued the handling of these differences to this pro∣position, which may serue as a Carollary to the rest. First wee take it as granted that Ptolomy so appointed the Parallells (out of which the climates must arise) that he numbred 38 both wayes from the Equatour: to wit, 38 towards the South, and so many towards the North. These Parallels he so distingui∣shed, that 24 he numbred by quarters of houres, foure by halfe houres, foure by whole houres, and six by whole months. Hence is it that Geographers say, that a new Parallell is to be placed sometimes whereas the longest day increaseth by a quarter of an houre; sometimes where it increaseth by a halfe, sometimes by a whole houre, sometimes by a whole moneth. The first is to be vnderstood of those 24 Parallels which were deliuered by the Ancients before Ptolomy. The second, third, and fourth of such as were vnknowne vnto those Ancients before Ptolomy. To reduce all into order we will set downe this distinction. The distinction of the Climats is either ancient or new. The Anci∣ent was againe twofold: either former or latter. The former was that which was set downe before Ptolomies times, where∣in there were assigned seuen Climates according to the com∣mon opinion (though Mercator grants but 5) These Authours placed their Northerne bound in the 25 degrees or eleuation: The later distinction was almost the same, but somewhat corre∣cted by Ptolomy, who placed 9 Climates towards the North. The first passed by Meroe a Citty of Ethiopia, where the longest or Solstitiall day is 13 houres. The second by Siene in Egypt, where the longest day is 13 ½: The third by Alexandria in Egypt, where the longest day is 14 houres, the 4 th by the Iland of Rhodes, where the longest day is of 14 ½. The fift by Rome, where they haue the length of the longest day 15 houres. The sixt by Pontus, where the longest day is 15 ½ houres. The seauenth by the mouth of Boristhenes where the longest day is of 16 houres. Neuerthelesse some haue drawne the 6 Climate by Boristhenes in Sarmatia, and the sea∣uenth by the Riphaean mountaines. Ptolomy to this number addes two more, and so reckons them that the 8 should passe by the Riphaean mountaines, and the 9 by Denmarke where the day at longest is 17 houres. To these Northerne Climats they opposed so many towards the South, which they called Anti∣climates. These as it should seeme in Ptolomi s time were I∣maginary altogether, because few or no places were discoue∣red at that time beyond the Line. But to leaue P olomy and his old Authors, and examine the industry of later Geographers, wee shall finde the Distinction of the Climates to bee twofold; either vnperfect wherein they numbred onely 19 Climates; or perfect, wherein they accounted 46 or 48, of which 23 or 24 were Northerne, and the other on the opposite part, to wit, in the South. The perfect distinction of the Climates is againe (as later writers speake) either certaine or vncertaine. The certaine they call that wherein the Climates are distin∣guished and ranged from the Equatour to the Polar circle: For sithens the Northerne Regions are now discouered beyond 70 degrees of the Eleuation of the Pole, and a Climate is defined to bee a space comprehended betwixt three Parallels in the ha∣bitable Earth: wherein the length of the longest day is increa∣sed by halfe an houre; Therefore it must needs be, that from the Equatour to that habitable part of the Earth, wherein the lon∣gest day is 24 houres (which is not farre from the Pole-circle) there should be placed 24 Climates. The vncertaine distinction they call that which is betwixt the Polar circle, and the Pole it selfe, which may bee tearmed Improper ; because in these Cli∣mates the day is not increased by halfe houres, as in the former, but first by whole Dayes, then by We kes, and last of all by whole Moneths : In so much that vnder the Pole it selfe they haue 6 Moneths perpetuall day, and so long againe a continu ll night. The Parallels whereof the Climates are made, were set downe by Ptolomie 38 (as wee haue said) but the later wri∣ters haue placed them so farre Northernly, that they reach to that tract wherein the Sunne tarries aboue the Horizon a whole 24 houres, and so haue numbred 23 or 24 towards the North, and so many towards the South. The cause of this diuersity is be∣cause some draw the first by the mouth of the Redde-Sea: o∣thers by Meroe: for the farther consideration of these climates corrected by later Goegraphers, they beginne their account from the Equatour it selfe, which in this case is the best rule of certainty: because we hold that whole tract of Earth to bee ha∣bitable, as we shall proue in our second booke. 14 A Parallell is a space wherein the longest day is increased by a quarter of an houre. Concerning the Parallels, little can be said more then were haue opened in the doctrine of the Climats: for (as we shewed) the one cannot be well vnderstood without the other: only to auoid ambiguity of speech, wee must consider that a Parallell may bee taken either for a Line or Circle, in which senfe wee tooke it in the fift Chapter; where we diuided them into Named or Name∣lesse: or else for a space bounded by circles as wee here vnder∣stand it. The neglect of this distinction hath made some Geogra∣phers speake sometimes improperly. The Parallell is found out by this rule. 1 Let the number of the longest day aboue 12 be multiplied by 4, and the Product will shew the Parallell. The reason is giuen before in the doctrine of the Climates, be∣cause the Parallell space, according to Latitude, is but halfe the Climate: so that as in finding out the climate for any place wee ought to double the houres of the longest day aboue 12: so here wee ought to quadruple them, which is to multiply them by 4: As for example at Rome we finde the longest day to be about 15, which exceeds 12 by 3; which being againe multiplied by 4, will produce 12, which is the Parallell for the place. 2 The Parallels no where diuide the Climats in∣to two equall parts. In the climates wee are to consider two things, either their la∣titude or bredth from North to South: or their longitude or extent from East to West. In respect of the former wee may hardly without sensible errour call the Parallell halfe the Cli∣mate, in regard the three lines whereof the climate consists, to wit, the middle and the two extreames, are not alwaies of like distance: but if we consider the extent of the Circumference as is stretcheth i selfe betwixt East and West, we must needes ac∣knowledge much more: to wit, that of two Parallels, diuiding the same climate betwixt them, that that is manifestly the grea∣test which is next the Equatour, and that is the least which is neerest to the Pole: because the Circles which comprehend their Parallell spaces, continually decrease towards the Pole : so that if we imagine two men to trauell round about the earth, the one in a Parallell neerer the Equatour, the other neerer the Pole, in the same space of time; it must needs follow that he should goe far faster which is neerer the Equatour then the other neere the Pole: for howsoeuer Columella seemes to make a Parallell to haue in bredth 60 foot, and to intimate by consequence an e∣quality of the Parallels amongst themselues, yet must this bee vnderstood of Parallels which are neere one to the other neerer the Equatour, which comprehend a great space of land, and admit no sensible difference. Other matters which concerne the Climates and Parallells, shall be (God willing) vnfolded in our Tables in the next Chapter, when we haue spoken of the Inha∣bitants, and such other adiuncts appertaining▪ without the which this treatise will be vnperfect, depending for a great part on such circumstances as our method admits not in this place, but immediatly follow. CHAP. X. Of the distinction of the Inhabitants of the Terrestriall Spheare. 1 HAuing hitherto treated of the distin∣ction of spaces bounded by circles in the Terrestriall Globe, to wit, Zones, Climates, and Parallels ; wee are now to treate of the Inhabitants, as such adiuncts as pro∣perly belong to such spaces; so farre as it concernes the constitution of the whole Spheare. 2 The distinction of the Inhabitants is two∣fold, either Absolute or Comparatiue: Abso∣lute as they may be considered in themselues without any comparison of one with the other. 3 The former is againe twofold: either from the Position of the Spheare, or the differences of their Sun-Shadowes: According to the po∣sition of the Spheare the Inhabitants may be said to haue either a Right, Oblique, or Parallell Spheare according to their Horizons. What these three Spheares are, may appeare by that which we haue formerly spoken concerning the distinction of Horizons in the sixt Chapter of this Treatise, and therefore needs no farther repetition: we are in this place to treat of the seuerall accidents, and conditions of the Inhabitants. Out of the distinction of the threefold Spheare will arise 13 manners of habitation: which for more order sake, wee will reduce into certaine heads in this manner. 4 The people of a right Spheare are such as in∣ioy aright Horizon, whose proprieties shall be declared in this Theoreme. 1 The Inhabitants of a Right Spheare in respect of the heauens haue the same accidents. These accidents are chiefly foure, 1 They inioy a perpetuall Equinoctiall, hauing their dayes and nights alwayes equall the one to the other: because the Sunne neuer swaruing from his Eclipticke, hath his course equally diuided by the Horizon. 2 With them all the starres equally set and rise; because all the Pa∣rallels wherein the starres make their Diurnall Reuolution are equally cut of the Horizon. 3 To them the Sunne is twice in the yeere verticall, that is directly ouer their heads, and twice againein the yeere Solstitiall: The former in the first degrees of Aries and Libra, the latter in the first degrees of Cancer and Capricorne: which diuerse propositions of the Sunne, some later Geographers haue tearmed foure Solstices: two higher and two lower. 4 Hence comes it to passe that they yeerely enioy two winters, and two Summers: likewise two springs and two Au∣tumnes. Their Summer when the Sunne is to them verticall: their winter when it is seated in either of the Tropicks. Their Spring and Autumnes while the Sunne is passing through the middle spaces betwixt both. 5 The people inhabiting an Oblique Spheare are such whose Horizon is oblique. The proprie∣ties belonging vnto them are either Generall or Speciall. 6 The Generall are such as agree to all those which inhabit an oblique Spheare. 1 All the Inhabitants of an oblique Spheare agree in two proprieties. These two proprieties wherein they agree are these. 1 To all the Inhabitants without the Equatour vnder what Parallell soeuer, the dayes are equall to the nights only twice in a yeere, to wit, either in the beginning of the Spring, or the beginning ofthe Autumne. At other times either the dayes increase aboue the nights as in the Summer, or grow lesser as in the winter. 2 To these inhabitants some stars are perpetually seene, as such which are neere the Pole to which they incline: some are neuer seene, as such as are farthest off from the said Pole: some rise and set, which are those which are in the middle space betwixt both; which are sometimes visible, and sometime lie hid. 7 The speciall Accidents of an Oblique Hori∣zon, are such as agree to speciall places in the same Spheare. 1 The Inhabitants of an Oblique Spheare of fiue sorts, inioying so many correspondent pro∣perties. The first sort are of those, whose Zenith is betwixt the Equator and one of the Tropickes, euen vnto the 23. Degrees, 30. Scruples of eleuation of the Pole: In such a sort, towards the North be∣twixt the Line and the Tropicke of Cancer, are placed the inha∣bitants of Zeilan, the extreame part of the East Indies, His∣paniola, Guinea, Nubia, with some part of Arabia foelix, and all other places betwixt the Equatour and the Tropicke of Cancer in the Torride Zone. Towards the South in the same La∣titude, are placed the Brasilians, the Peruuians, the Iauans, with many others. The Accidents which happen vnto these Nations are these, 1. They may see all the starres except a few which are neere the Pole. 2. Their dayes and nights are some∣what vnequall, so that their longest day, or longest night, is not alway of the same quantity. 3. Twice in the yeare they haue the Sunne-verticall, but without the Equatour. 4. They haue two Summers, and two Winters, but not equally tempe∣red. 5. The length of their longest day reacheth to 13. ½ houres. The second sort are such as inhabite vnder the Tropicke it selfe, whose eleuation of the Pole is equall to the greatest de∣clination of the Sunne, which is 23. degrees, 30 Scruples. Vn∣der the Tropicke of Cancer is placed a great part of Arabia foe∣lix, East India, the Southerne parts of China, the higher parts of Egypt, and Siene. Vnder the Tropicke of Capricorne are pla∣ced the people of Monomotapa, and Madagascar, with other places: The accidents belonging vnto them are these, 1. To them appeare all the starres comprehended in one of the circles, but none of the other. As for example, to those inhabiting the Tropicke of Cancer, the starres included within the Articke Circle alwayes appeare, but neuer those which are in the An∣tarcticke: likewise to those which dwell vnder the Tropicke of Capricorne, all the starres appeare which are contained within the Antarticke Circle, but none of those included within the Articke Circle. 2. By how much neerer the Sunne approa∣cheth to their Zenith or Verticall point, by so much are their dayes lengthened; and by how much farther it goes off, by so much are they shortned: so that they inioy then their longest day, when the Sunne directly passeth by their Zenith. 3. To them the Sunne is verticall but once in the yeere: to wit, to those vnder the Tropicke of Cancer, when the Sunne enters into the signe; as to the other when it toucheth the first Degree of Capricorne. 4. They haue but one Summer and one Winter throughout the yeere. The third sort, are such inhabitants as dwell in one of the temperate Zones betwixt the Tropicke and the Polar Circles from 24. Degrees of eleuation, to 66. Degrees, 30. Scruples. Such inhabitants towards the North, are (as wee haue shewed) almost all the inhabitants of Europe, Asia maior, and part of Africa: as on the other side towards the South, the Chylienses, the farthermost Africans, and those that dwell neere the straits of Magellane. Their properties are chiefly these, 1. Many starres are by them alwayes seene, and many neuer appeare. 2. Their dayes notably differ in inequality. 3. The sunne ne∣uer arriues at their Zenith, but is alwayes on the South of those which inhabite betwixt the Tropicke of Cancer, and the Articke Circle, and alwayes on the North side of such as dwell in the opposite temperate Zone. 4. They haue in the yeere but one Summer and Winter, but by reason of the diuer∣sity of places much vnequall: for where the eleuation of the Pole is greater, the winter is much harder; but where it is lesser it is more temperate. The fourth kinde of inhabitants, are those which reside vn∣der the Polar Circle, (which is their Zenith) where the tem∣perate Zone endes, and the cold beginnes: where the eleuati∣on of the Pole is beyond 66. Degrees 30. Minutes, in which Tract lies Noua Zembla, with many other Ilands not yet well discouered in the North: and perhaps as many more vnder the Antarticke Circle towards the South, lesse knowne than the o∣ther. The accidents belonging to them are these, 1. Those which inhabite vnder the Arcticke Circle, see all the starres in∣cluded within the Tropicke of Cancer, but neuer those with∣in the Tropicke of Capricorne: Likewise, those which liue vnder the Antarcticke Circle, see all the starres within the Tropicke of Capricorne, but neuer those within the other Tropicke of Cancer. 2. Their longest day at Midsummer is 24. houres, their night then being but a moment: likewise their longest night, as at Mid-winter, is but 24. houres, their day passing not a moment. 3. The Center of the Sunne euery yeere twice toucheth at their Horizons. 4. The Sunne at Noonetide is alwayes on the South of those which dwell vnder the Ar∣cticke Circle, except it bee in the Summer Tropicke, when it is the Mid-night, or Northerne point: likewise to those that are vnder the Antarcticke Circle, the Sunne at noone is alwayes on the North side, except vnder the Winter Tropicke. 5. They haue in the yeere one Winter and one Summer: but the Win∣ter farre colder, and the Summer slacker then in the forenamed places. The fift and last habitation, is of those which are included betwixt the Polar Circle, and the Pole it selfe, from 66. De∣grees and 30. minutes of leuation to 90. In which Tract, little is discouered Northward, and in the South climate no∣thing at all. The speciall Accidents appertaining to them are these, 1. With them a few starres are seene to set and rise. 2. They haue an Equinox the Sunne touching the first De∣gree of Aries and Libra. 3. They of the North Zone haue more dayes about the middle of Summer, and more nights in the Win∣ter: likewise, they of the South frozen Zone, the contrary. 4. They haue extreame cold Winters, and in stead of Summer, a small remission of cold. 5. The signes of the Zodiacke to them preposterously rise. 8 The inhabitants of a Parallell Spheare are discouered in this proposition. 1 The inhabitants of a Parallell Spheare enioy but one kinde of habitation, in respect of the Heauens. A Parallell Spheare, I here accurately vnderstand for that po∣siture of the Globe, wherein the Pole of the world is precisely placed in the Zenith, or eleuated to 90. degrees of Altitude: be∣cause onely in such a site, the Equ tor and the Horizon agree in one, and lye parallell to all the rest of the Parallell Circles: which places, whether it bee at all capable of habitation by reason of cold, wee shall discusse hereafter in the second part: but out of supposition admitting a place of habitation, these accidents will happen, 1. The fixt stars which they see, are alwayes seene so, that with them there is no point of East or West; for the starres neuer rise nor set. But the Planets rise and set, but not by their diurnall, but proper motion. 2. They haue a continuall day of sixe moneths, and a night also as long, the Sunne rising conti∣nually in the first degree of Aries, and setting in the first of Libra. 3. The Sunne in the Equinoctiall points, for all the time that hee is aboue the Horizon (as all the other starres) is turned round about in manner of a wheele. 4. The Equatour serues in place of the Horizon, and the Equatour is euery where equi∣distant from the Pole 5. They haue one Winter and one Sum∣mer, the former exceeding cold, the latter lesse warme then ours. 9 The second distinction of the inhabitants of the earth is taken from their Noone-shad∣dowes. The Sunne in diuers parts of the earth diuersly spreads his shaddow, because the Gnomons or Opacous bodies by which the shadowes are made in the earth, are in diuers places diuersly op∣posed, or obiected to the Sunne: for whereas the Sunne so runs in his Eclipticke Circle betwixt the two Poles, that though his passage be in an oblique Circle, yet he neuer comes so farre as the Poles themselues: it necessarily must be, that sometimes he should shoot forth his beames perpendicularly, as when it is in the verticall point of a place; sometimes Obliquely, as when he de∣clines either one way or other from the verticall point; some∣times in parallell wise, for as much as in some places of the earth, the Sun cleauing as it were to the Horizon, casts out his beames parallell and equidistant to the plaine of the Horizon. The right or perpendicular▪ beames of the Sunne, falling on the superficies of the earth at right Angles, are turned and reflected into them∣selues, and so make no shaddowes at all. But the oblique beames, in that they are not reflected into themselues, must of necessity produce shaddowes, yet in diuers manners; for those Sunne-beames which obliquely proiect themselues on the plaine of the earth, so as they come not from the Horizon it selfe, will make such kinde of shaddowes as shall proportionally agree with their Gnomons, or Opacous bodies, and such whose magnitude may in a manner be designed out, and certainly measured by the sight. But on the contrary part, the beames which are esteemed paral∣lell to the plaine of the Horizon, finding no solide obstacle or let, shoot forth infinitely, making no Angles on the superficies of the earth, and can haue no proportion at all with their Gnomons, that the shaddow may be any way designed by our eyes. But here we are to consider, that the shaddowes chiefly to be considered, are the Meridian or Noone-shaddowes, which take their distinction from the diuers incidency of the beames, which the Sunne casts forth at noone. According to this manner. 10. The inhabitants of a place in respect of the shaddowes are either Amphiscij, Heteroscij, or Periscij. The Amphiscij are those, whose Noone-shaddowes (but at diuers times of the yeere) are ast both wayes; that is to say, North and South. Amphiscij signifies as much as people of a double shaddow: such are they which inhabite betwixt the Equatour and the Tropickes, where the eleuation of the Pole equals not 24. de∣grees: These men haue the Sunne twice euery yeere in their Zenith or verticall point, and then they make no shaddowes at all; and therefore they are called Ascij, or without shad∣dowes. But when the Sunne passeth from their verticall point towards the Northerne signes, then at noone it will cast the shaddow towards the Southerne coast: But contrarywise, com∣ming from the Zenith toward the Southerne signes, the shaddow will bee darted toward the North, which is euident out of the Opticke principles; because the shaddow is alwayes found to be opposite in place to the Sunne-beames, the Gnomon, or darke body interposed. 11. The Heteroscij are those, whose Noone-shaddowes turne only one way, that is, either toward the North, or toward the South. These Nations inhabite in a, temperate Zone, betwixt the Tropicke and the Polar Circles, whereas such as dwell in the temperate toward the North, betwixt the Tropicke of Cancer and the Polar Circle Articke, haue their noone-shaddowes cast Northward. But those on the other side of the Equatour▪ dwelling betwixt the Tropicke of Capricorne, and the An∣tarcticke Circle, cast their shaddowes Southward: Of the for∣mer sort are Grecians, Italians, French, Spaniards, Germans, Po∣lonians, Suedians, Danes, English, and the rest inhabiting our temperate Zone: which gaue occasion of that speech of Lucan the Poët, concerning the Arabians comming into Thessaly, in the warre of Hanniball and Pompey ; Ignotum vobis Ar bes venistis in orbem, Vmbras mirati nemorum non ire sinistras. Y'are come Arabians to an vnknowne land, Wondering the shades nere take the Southward hand. Which verses are in this sense to be vnderstood; Poets are said to looke and turne their faces towards the West, so that the South must of neces ity be counted the left side: Now the place whereunto the Arabians came, being a part of Thessaly, where such dwell who only cast their shaddowes one way, to wit, Northward; but Arabia their naturall Countrey, being suppo∣sed to be included in the Torrid Zone, where the shaddowes were said to be cast both wayes, they are said to wonder: The reason why our shaddowes at noone are cast alwayes toward the North, and the others toward the South, is related before, to be because the shaddow doth alwayes occupie or possesse the place opposite to the Sunne, or light body. 12 The Periscij are such in habitants whose shad∣dowes are mooued round about them in a circular forme. In some places of the earth the Noone-shaddowes take not their beginning from our heads, but of one side, and are extended forward to the plaine of the terrestriall Horizon, and so moo∣ued round about the Opacous body, as about a Gnomon : whence they are called Periscij ; which is as much to say, as men hauing shaddowes mooued round about; such is their habitation which are included in the Frigid Zone, circumscri∣bed within the Polar circles, and the Poles: Here the Sunne neuer directly passeth by the crowne of their heads, but at one side: so that they haue the Pole for their verticall point, but the Equatour, as it were, for their Horizon. These Periscij are of two sorts, for some are contained in the Arcticke circle, the other in the Antarcticke, whereof both are as yet vndiscoue∣red; especially the Antarcticke, being farthest off from our climate. 1 The habitation of the Amphiscij comprehends 7. Parallels, of the Heteroscij 41. of the Pe∣riscij 6. Moneths. Of the nature and accidents of these three sorts of people there needs no more to be spoken, then wee haue deliuered before in this Chapter; Neuerthelesse, for a recapitulation of our former doctrine in this & the precedent Chapter, it will not be amisse to insert this table of Climates, set out by our exactest Geographers ; wherein is expressed (as it were) to our view the respect and seuerall accidents, which belong to these seuerall inhabitants. 13 Thus much for the Inhabitants absolutely considered: The inhabitants compared one with the other according to their position, are the Perioeci, Antoeci, and Antipodes. 14 The Perioeei are those inhabitants which dwell in the two opposite points of the Pa∣rallell circle. 15 The Antoeci are such as dwell vnder the same Meridian, but in diuers Parallels equally di∣stant from the Equatour. 16 The Antipodes are such as inhabite vnder one Meridian, but vnder two Parallels equidistant from the Equatour, and two opposite points of those Parallels. A Table of the Climates belonging to the three sorts of Inhabitants: Pag: 229. Inhabitants belonging to severall Cli∣mats. Climes Parallels The long∣est summer day. Hou. Scr. Latitude & elevati∣on of Pole. Scr. Degr. The breadth of the Climats. Deg. Scr The places by which the Climates passe. 0 0 1 12 0 12 15 0 0 4 18 4 18 The beginning from the Aequatour. 1 2 3 122 30 1 45 8 34 12 43 8 25 Sinus Arabicus or the Red Sea. Amphiscij. 2 4 5 13 0 13 15 16 43 20 33 7 50 Meroe an Iland of Nilus in Aegypt. 3 6 7 13 40 13 45 23 10 27 36 7 3 Siene a Ci ty in A∣frica. 4 8 9 14 0 14 15 30 47 33 45 6 9 Alexandria in Ae∣gypt. 5 10 11 14 30 14 45 36 30 39 2 5 17 Rhodes and Baby∣lon. 6 12 13 15 0 15 15 41 22 4 3 4 30 Rome and Helle∣spont. 7 14 15 15 30 15 45 45 29 47 20 3 48 Venice and Mil∣laine. 8 16 17 16 0 16 15 49 21 50 33 3 13 Podalia and he les∣ser Tartary. 9 18 19 16 30 16 45 51 58 53 17 2 44 Batavia and Wit∣ enberge. 20 17 0 17 54 9 55 4 2 17 R stoch. 11 22 23 17 30 17 45 7 57 34 2 0 Ireland and Mos∣covy. Ieteroscij. 12 24 25 18 0 18 15 58 26 59 14 1 40 Bohus a Castle in Norwey. 13 26 27 18 30 18 45 59 59 60 40 1 26 Gothland. 14 28 29 19 0 19 15 61 18 61 53 1 13 Bergis in Norwey. 15 30 31 19 30 19 45 62 25 62 54 1 0 VViburge in Fin∣land. 16 32 33 20 0 20 15 63 22 63 46 0 52 Arotia in Sweden. 17 34 35 20 30 20 45 64 6 64 30 0 44 The mouth of Dare∣cally a riuer of Swedē 18 36 37 21 0 21 15 64 49 65 6 0 36 Diverse places of Norwey. 19 38 39 21 30 21 45 65 21 65 35 0 29 Suecia, Alba Rus∣sia. 20 40 41 22 0 22 15 65 47 65 57 0 22 With many Ilands 21 42 43 22 0 22 45 66 6 66 14 0 17 Therevnto adioy∣ning, 22 44 45 23 0 23 15 66 20 66 25 0 11 Wanting speciall names, 23 46 47 23 30 23 45 66 28 66 0 0 5 And Landmarkes. 24 48 24 0 66 31 0 0 Island vnder the A ¦tick circle. Here the Cli∣mats are accoū∣ted by the mōths from 66 Degr. Menses 1 67 15 These Climates are supposed to passe by Diverse Ilands within the Artick circle, as These names being originally Greeke are taken from the di∣uerse manner of dwelling of one nation in respect of another. The Perioeci are called such as dwell (as it were) about the He∣mispheare in the same Parallell in two opposite points: the one in regard of the other being Easterne, the other Westerne: so that they are supposed to differ the one from the other 180 de∣grees which is the semicircle: where we are to note, that these degrees are to be num∣bred, not in a greater but a lesser Parallell, which is lesse then the Equa∣tour. For they which are vn∣der the Equa∣tor it selfe in 2 opposite points are to bee ac∣counted rather Antipodes, although (for ought I see) the name might agree. The Antoeci (as the name imports) are such as dwell one against another, hauing one selfe-same Meridian and equall distance from the Equatour, the one in the Nor∣therne, the other in the Southerne Hemispheare. The Anti∣podes (otherwise called Antichthones ) may popularly bee des∣cribed to bee such as dwell feet to feet one against the other: so that a right line being drawne from one side to the other, will passe by the Center of the world▪ whence they precisely are distant the one from the other 1800 in a greater circle: wherein they are distinguished from the Perioeci, which are diuided by the degrees of a lesser circle: such compared one to the other are the Americans and the Easterne Indians about the riuer Ganges ; the Inhabitants of Peru and Calecute : those of Peria & Summatra to England I finde no other Antipodes but the Sea, or at least some parcell of land in the South continent neere Psittacorum Regio: Here is to be noted that the former defini∣tion of Antipodes giuen by the ancients, was only to bee vnder∣stood of the knowne habitable part of the Earth; because such as dwell directly vnder the Equatour, or either of the Poles, although they may bee Antipodes agree not to that definition: by reason the former are Antipodes only in opposite points of the Equatour: the other of the Meridian. Whether there were any Antipodes or no, was made a question amongst the Anci∣ents, in so much that Saint Augustine in his booke de ciuitate Dei, and Lactantius in his third booke of Institutions, seemes stiffely to defend the contrary: which opinion is supposed to grow out of their contempt or neglect of Mathematicall stu∣dies, in those ages wherein the zeale to religion was most vn∣necessarily opposed to Philosophie, and the mistresse forsaken of her best hand-maides: which ignorance of the Ancients was so farre deriued to posterity, that in the yeere of our Sauiour 745 one Boniface Bishop of Mens, was accused before the Pope Zachary Virgilius Bishop of Salisburg, for heresy, in that hee, auerred there were Antipodes: The matter being first preferred to the King of Bohemia, and an appeale made vnto the Pope, it happened that the honest Bishop for this assertion, was flatly condemned for hereticall doctrine, and inforced to recant his opinion: yet is it wonderfull how such matters were thus deci∣ded: for granting these two easie grounds. First that the earth is Sphericall, a proposition proued in their time; 2 That euery place, or at least two opposite places in the Terrestriall Spheare may bee habitable; it must of necessity follow, that such Anti∣podes must bee granted: which makes me to imagine that Saint Augustine absolutely and grossely denied not the Antipodes ; because in setting downe the premises and grounds of our opi∣nion, hee seemed to vnderstand them too well to deny a ne∣cessary induction, being a man of so great a wit and apprehen∣sion: but questionlesse he thought that the Torrid Zone, which by most of the Ancients in his time, was reputed vnhabitable and vnpassable, no man had yet set his foot in those remote parts beyond the line: so that it seemed in him not to arise out of ignorance of the constitution of the earthly Globe: but out of the receaued opinion of the Torrid Zone, and the vast Ocean: the one of which hee held vnhabitable, the other vnpassable: from whence also sprang vp an argument, or rather an idle fancie, that the Antipodes could not be admitted without granting another Sauiour, and another kinde of men besides Adams posterity: for if this coniecture had not taken place, the Pope (I suppose) would neuer haue proued himselfe so ridiculous a Iudge, as to haue condemned Virgilius for heresie. As for Lactantius (how∣soeuer otherwise a pious eloquent Father) the weakenesse and childishnesse of his arguments, will to any indifferent reader dis∣couer his ignorance in the very first rudiments of Cosmogra∣phie. Here we may learne how farre religion it selfe is wron∣ged by such who set her opposite to all her seruants. But what∣soeuer the Ancients out of their glimring reason haue coniectu∣red, our times haue sufficiently decided this controuersie; wher∣in such Antipodes are established both by reason and experience: which mat er wee shall reserue to our second booke; wherein we shall declare how farre, and in what sense the Earth may bee tearmed habitable. 1 Those which are to vs Perioeci, are the Antoeci to our Antipodes : our Antoeci the Periaeci to our Antipodes : likewise our Perioeci are the Anti∣podes to our Antaeci. This Proposition as a Corollary may by necessary consequence be deduced out of the precedent definition, and be well expres∣sed out of the constitution of the artificiall Globe, and needs no farther demonstration. 2 The Perioeci, Antoeci, and Antipodes are di∣uersly distinguished in respect of the celestiall ap∣parences. The proprieties of the Perioeci are chiefly foure. 1 They haue the same eleuation of the Pole, and therefore the same temper of the yeere, and the same length of dayes and nights. 2 They dwell East and West in regard one of the other. 3 They haue contrary times of dayes and nights: for when the one hath his Noone, the other inioyes his mid-night: likewise when the Sun with the one riseth, it setteth with the other. 4 They haue the same Zone, Climate, and Parallell; but differ by a semicircle▪ to wit, 180 degrees. To the Antoeci they haue likewise assigned 5 proprieties▪ viz. 1 They inhabite the like Zones, but in di∣uerse Hemispheares. 2 They haue the same eleuation of the pole, but not of the same pole: because the one sees the pole Arcticke, the other the pole Antarcticke, equally raised aboue his Horizon. 3 They haue Noone and Mid-night iust at the same times. 4 They inioy the same temper of the Heauens▪ 5 They haue the seasons of the yeere contrary. For when the Southerne Antoeci haue their Summer, the Northerne haue their Winter; and contrariwise: when the Northerne haue their spring, these haue their Autumne. To the Antipodes they haue allotted 3 Pro∣prieties. 1 That they haue the same eleuation of the pole, though not of the same pole. 2 They haue the same temper of the yeere, and the same quantity of dayes and nights. 3 They haue all the other accidents contrary: For when the one hath Night the other hath Day, when one Winter, the other Sum∣mer; when the one the Spring, the other Autumne; and con∣trariwise. These accidents and proprieties here mentioned, must be vnderstood in respect of the Heauens only. The qualities ari∣sing from diuerse other Accidentall and particular causes in di∣uerse places of the Earth, we shall differre vnto our second part▪ CHAP. XI. Of the Longitudes and Latitudes. 1 THe distinction of the Terrestriall Globe according to certaine Spaces, being for∣merly explaned, we are now to treat of the Distinction of the said Spheare according to certaine Distances. 2 A Distance here we vnderstand to be a direct line drawne betwixt two points in the Earth: such a Distance is twofold, either Simple or Comparatiue. 3 The Simple Distance is taken from the two great circles, to wit the Meridian, or the Equatour: which is either the Longitude or La∣titude. The diuision of Distances into the Simple or Comparatiue, is most necessary: for it is one thing for a place absolutely taken in it selfe, to be distant from some fixt point or other in the Globe: Another for two places to be compared betwixt themselues in regard of such a fixt point: for as much as the former implies on∣ly the distance betwixt two points, the other the distance of two such points or places in respect of the third. These points, from which such points are said to be distant, are either found in the Meridian Circle, from which the Distance is called Longitude; or else in the Equatour, whence we call it Latitude. 4 The Longitude is the distance of any place Eastward from the first Meridian. To vnderstand the better the Longitude, we must consider that it may be taken two wayes: either Generally, or Specially : In the former sense it is taken for the Distance of the whole Earth, stretched from the West vnto the East, and contrariwise from East to West. The bounds or limits of this Longitude were by Ptolomie and the ancient Cosmographers set no farther distant then the halfe circle, containing 180 degrees; because the rest of the Earth lay at that time vndiscouered. The end of this space towards the East, was the Kingdome of China, at the far∣thest part of all India, distant, as wee said, from the Fortunate Ilands where Ptolomie placed the first Meridian, 180 degrees: which being taken in the Meridian, and resolued into Miles, ac∣cording to our former rules, will giue 10800 Italian miles: but this space delineated out by the Ancients, was very scant and narrow in respect of the other parts since found out, being added to the former. For beyond the bound set by Ptolomie in the East, it is manifest that 60 degrees are found out and made knowne. An example whereof wee haue in Scythia with∣ou the mountaine Emaus, which is knowne to extend it selfe 60 degrees Eastward towards the Kingdome of Cathay, disco∣uered by the Portugals: so that the breadth of the Earth East∣ward is fully knowne so farre as 240 degrees, which being mea∣sured in the Equatour will amount vnto 14000 miles. More∣ouer towards the West, beyond the Fortunate Ilands, it is knowne to stretch to the farthest border of America ; so that 340 degrees of the earth is fully detected, if not all the rest be∣ing only 20 degrees, which are only deficient to make vp the whole circle. Which wee may the sooner credit; because our times haue brought forth (for ought any Authors haue related) the most excellent Nauigators of all ages, which haue say∣led the vast Globe of the Earth round about, and left behinde them a foundation whereon others might easily build. But to let passe the Generall Longitude of the Earth betwixt the East and the West; Wee must vnderstand that the Longitude here mentioned is to bee taken in a more speciall sense, for the Di∣stance of any place from the first Meridian, being placed either in the Canaries, as the Ancients would haue it, or in one of the Azores according to the latter Geographers. This then must be the bound from whence wee must beginne our account; The subiect wherein the number of degrees may bee taken, may bee the Equatour or Parallell. Whence by some the Longitude of a place is defined to bee an Arch of the Equatour or Parallell in∣tercepted betwixt the first Meridian and the verticall point of the place proposed: so that by necessary consequence, such places as are subiect to the same Meridian, in the same Hemispheare, Easterne or Westerne, haue the same Longitude, which is the distance from the point of the West: but places declining more towards the East haue the greater Longitude; but neerer to the West, les e. 1 Places inioying the same Longitude are not al∣wayes equally distant from the first Meridian, and contrarywise places equidistant from the first Meridian haue not alwayes the same Longitude. The reason is euident out of that which hath beene often spoken before: because the degrees of a greater circle are greater, of a lesser lesse, according to the greatnesse of the circle. Now the Longitude of a place measured in the Equatour, will answer to 60 Italian miles: but in other Parallels lesse. 2 The difference of Longitudes begets the diffe∣rence of Times: Those therefore which exactly are subiect to the same Longitude, haue their Noone at the same moment: but where the Longitudes are different, the Noonetides are also different. That the difference of time is varied according to the difference of Longitude in diuerse parts of the Earth, is a matter obuious to euery mans vnderstanding, out of two premised grounds. 1 That the Earth is Sphaericall. 2 That the Sunne in his Diurnall course once in 24 houres compasseth it round: whence it comes to passe that places situate Eastward, see the Sunnes sooner then those which are placed in the West, and that with a proportionall difference of time, that to euery houre in the Sunne motion is assigned a certaine number of correspondent miles: which is in some sort expressed in a Geographicall Globe or Map, wherein we shall finde described 12 Meridians, which diuide the whole compasse of the earthly Spheare into 24 equall parts; in such sort that betwixt each of the two neerest Meridians, are reck∣ned 15 degrees, which make one houre: by which wee may more easily vnderstand how soone the Noone-time happens in one Citty before another: for if one Citty stands Eastward from another the space of three of those foresaid Meridians, it is eui∣dent that it will inioy noone three houres before the other. The reason of this difference of times, is the difference of Longitudes, wherein to euery houre the Cosmographers haue allotted 15 degrees in the Sunnes Diurnall motion: so that 15 degrees mul∣tiplied by 24 houres, which is the whole naturall day, there will bee produced 360 which is the number of degrees in the whole circle, 3 If two men from the same place trauell, the one Eastward, the other Westward round about the Earth, and meet in the same place againe: they shall finde that he which hath gone Eastward hath gotten, and the other going Westward hath lost a day in their account. This is without difficulty to be vnderstood, out of the change of Longitudes, seconded by their trauell, varying perpetually the quantity of the day: for it is manifest, that hee who from a∣ny place assigned saileth Eastward mouing continually against the motion of the Sunne, will shorten somewhat of his day; taking away so much from it, as his iourney in proportion of di∣stance, hath opposed and anticipated in the time the Di∣urnall course of the Sunne: so that daily gaining something from the length of the day, which must bee elsewhere recom∣penced. It must needs be, that in the whole circuite of the earth, it will amount to 24. houres, correspondent to the whole cir∣cuite of the Sunne, and the compasse of the earth, which will make another day: Likewise, if we suppose another in com∣passing about the earth, to goe Westward, it cannot bee otherwise imagined, but that seconding the course of the Sunne, by his owne iourney; hee will daily adde some∣what to the length of his day, answerable to his distance, from the place wherein hee began to follow the Sunne in his course from East to West. The daily addition to the length of the day, proportionall to the longitudes which he changeth, (the Sunne running a like course) must daily diminish somewhat of the Di∣urnall course of the Sunne, and so at his iourneyes end, which was supposed to be the whole circuite of the earth, answerable to 24. houres in the Sunnes course, it will loose a whole day. To demonstrate both these cases, wee will imagine in supposi∣tion, that of these two trauaillers going the one Eastward, the other Westward, the former should take away from the length of the day, or the latter adde to it for euery 15. miles one mi∣nute. Then by the golden Rule, if 15. miles either subtract or adde one minute in the length of the day, must 21600. miles, which is the whole compasse of the earth, accor∣ding to the same proportion, either subtract or adde 1440 mi∣nutes, which make 24. houres, the length of the naturall day. To confirme the demonstration by popular experience, I remem∣ber I haue read in the Hollanders discouery of Fretum de Mayre, that comming home into their owne Countrey, they found by comparing their accounts with their countrey∣mens at home, they had lost one day, hauing gone West∣ward, and so compassed the earth round. Hence will arise di∣uers consectaries not vnpleasing to be scann'd. One I will touch not much dissonant from our purpose; That three men residing in the same place at one time, shall notwithstanding all vary one from the other in the dayes of the weeke, keeping yet an exact ac∣count: which to explaine the better, wee will suppose a Iew, a Sarazen, and a Christian, residing in the same towne together: It may so happen according to our former grounds, that the Sa∣razen according to the Law of Mahomet, shall obserue his Fri∣day, the Iew his Saturday, being his Sabboth: and the Christian the Lords day, being the Sunday; yet so, as all shall happen on the same day: all of them excluding any errour in their calcu∣lation. For supposition sake, wee will place them all at one time all together in Palestine on a Saturday; at which time, let vs imagine the Sarazen to take his iourney Westward, the Christian Eastward, so as both of them in their coasts com∣passe the world, to meet againe in the same place: The Iew all the while we suppose resident in the same place: it will follow by necessary consequence, that the Sarazen go∣ing about the earth Eastward, will loose one day; the Christian iourneying Westward, will gaine one day: the Iew remaining in the same place, will neither gaine nor loose. These three men then, meeting together againe after a yeere, two, or three, at the same place, must needs make a diuers account; for one and the selfe-same day, will bee to the Sarazen Friday, to the Iew Saturday, and to the Christian Sunday, if they ex∣actly calculate the time from their first meeting, to their re∣turne vnto the same place. Mee thinkes this, if there wanted other Arguments, were a reason sufficient to conuince some strait-laced men, who rigidly contend our Lords day (which they erroneously tearme the Sabboth) to bee meerely morall, as grounded on the Law of nature. If it were so, according to our premises before demonstrated, this absurditie would en∣sue necessarily: That the Morall Law, which they call also in a sort the Law of nature, is subiect to manifold mutation, which by our best Diuines is vtterly denied. The conseque ce will easily follow, because it cannot be denied by any Christian, but that all nations of the world issued from Noahs Arke, the Seminary of mankinde, and spread themselues from thence o∣uer the face of the whole earth, some farther, some at a shor∣ter distance: whereby changing the longitude with their habi∣tation, they must of necessity alter the differences of times, wher∣on they seeke to ground their Sabboth. Neither at this day can any man exactly and precisely obserue any one day, either as it was first appointed by Moses in the Leuiticall Law, as it was instituted by Christs Apostles afterwards; by reason of the ma∣nifold transportation of colonies, and transmigration of Nations from one Region into another, whereby the times must neces∣sarily bee supposed to vary. And if any more moderate should vrge, that not the exact seuenth day from the first institution, bound vs to obseruation; so one day in seuen bee obserued: it can hardly passe without exception, for as much as if any man, as Magellane, Drake, or Candish, should trauaile the world about, a day must needs be varied, as we haue shewed. Here I would willingly demand, whether such trauailers returning home into their owne countreyes, should celebrate the same Lords day ac∣cording to the institution of their owne Church; or else as they finde according to their owne account: If they obserue the lat∣ter, they must schismatically diuide themselues from the Church, and keepe a Sabboth of their owne, which in euery mans iudge∣ment would be thought absurd, as the mother of many inconue∣niences: If the former take place, then must the d y be change∣able in his nature, and so one day of seuen of them should not be obserued. I speake not this to cherish any neglect of the duty we owe that day, but rather to proue it not meerely to be groun∣ded on the Law of Nature, as some would perswade; but rather an Ecclesiasticall constitution, deriued (as it seemes most proba∣ble) from the Apostles, though not in practice in Christs time, wherein the Iewish Sabboth was not yet abolished: But I haue dwelt too long on this, & may perhaps incurre sharpe cēsure, for wading too farre into the depth of Diuinity: But my Apology shall be this, that albeit I haue gone beyond my present subiect, I ue not yet transcended the limits of my profession: I serue no faction, and therefore dare aduenture my language as free as my opinion. 5 Concerning the longitude, two things are to be knowne, 1. The Inuention. 2. The Ex∣pression. The Inuention proposeth vs the way and manner of the first finding out of the lon∣gitude of places. There are few things in nature which haue more perplexed the wits of ingenious Mathematicians, then the exactest way of finding out the longitude of places: Not that the matter was o∣uer difficult in it selfe, but that they sought out a way to per∣forme this conclusion, not depending from the obseruation of the celestiall bodies and motions; a matter as yet neuer found out, and I feare mee vnpossible: Because they proposed to themselues one of these two wayes to finde it out; either by some magneticall instrument, or else by industry of nauigation: neither of which can much profit. Not the former, because there haue neuer beene any fixed points found in the Equatour, be∣twixt East and West, as betwixt North and South haue beene obserued: so that nothing can proceed out of the meere nature of the earthly Globe, whereon wee may ground any difference of longitude: Neither is the second very beneficiall, for that all voyages both by Sea and land, are very irregular and vncertaine, either by reason of sundry impediments, as rockes, mountaines; woods, contrary winds, and other dangers turning aside the di∣rect course of passengers from any direct way, or obseruation; or else by the Ignorance of Mariners, which seldome passe so farre on discouery: and if they doe, know not perfectly to de∣lineate out their iourney, as a Cosmographer would expect, to a∣ny tolerable satisfaction. Neuerthelesse, by Astronomicall ob∣seruation, wee haue many wayes left vs for the performance of this conclusion, as shall bee taught in these following proposi∣tions. 1 By an Eclypse of the Moone, the longitude may be found. This conclusion is in this sort to bee performed: First, it be∣hooueth you to know, as you may by an Ephemerides, at what houre an Eclipse shall happen at some knowne place, whereof you are well informed of the longitude: Then must bee ob∣serued by an Astrolable, or other Astronomicall instrument, at what houre this Eclipse begins at that place, whereof you would willingly know the longitude: If the Eclipse doe be∣ginne in both places the selfe-same time, you may assure your selfe that these two places differ not in longitude. But if there be a difference in the time, then must there be a difference in the longitude, which to finde out, you may in this sort proceed: Take the lesser summe of houres out of the greater, and there will be remaining, either houres or minutes, or both: If there remaine houres, then multiply the same by 15; if minutes, di∣uide the same by 4; (for in this account as wee haue taught, 15. Degrees make an houre) and adde the difference so found vn∣to the longitude, if the Ecclipse appeare there sooner: but if later, subtract it from the longitude formerly knowne. If there remaine any minutes after the diuision, you must multi∣ply those minutes by 15; and so shall yee haue the Minutes of Degrees. To explaine this the better, wee will take this famili∣ar example from some of our later writers. The longitude of Pa∣ris was set downe by Ptolomy, to be 23 degrees; now we may be informed by an Ephemerides, that a certaine Eclipse of the Moone beginnes there 3 houres after midnight; out of this I would willingly learne the longitude of Tubing a towne in Sueuia: In this towne I obserue by some Astronomicall instru∣ment, at what houre the Eclipse there beginnes, which I finde to bee at three of the clocke and 24 minutes after midnight. Then by the subraction of the lesser number of time out of the greater, I finde the remainder to be 24 minutes, which diuided by 4. which makes one degree, the quotient will bee 6. degrees: and that is the difference, which if you adde to the knowne longitude of Paris (because the Eclipse begins there sooner then at Paris ) it will amount to 29 degrees: wher∣by we may collect that the Longitude of Tubing is 9. degrees. To this rule for the most part are squared all Cosmographicall Tables of longitude, but yet in this happen diuers errours: 1. Be∣cause oftentimes in the Artificer there wants diligence in obser∣uing the right houre & moment of the Eclipse. 2. The diuers. E∣pacts & latitudes of the Moone are commonly neglected; wher∣fore some haue thought it the best way (if it were to be hoped) that diuers exact Astronomers should at diuers places obserue the same Eclipse, and so by conferring together according to the former Rule, finde out the longitudes of those places. But exact Astronomers cannot be so easily found in euery citie, wher∣of we desire to know the longitudes; or if there were such, they keepe not alwaies such correspondency in friendship; nei∣ther is an Eclipse of the Moone alwayes at command. Neuer∣thelesse, this way is not to bee despised, because where better wayes are wanting, wee must content our selues with what we finde. 2 By a Clocke, Watch, or Houre glasse, to finde out the longitude of a place. This conclusion is to be performed in this manner; You must get you a watch or clocke, apt to runne (if you can) 24 houres; this watch must you, by the helpe of an Astrolabe, rectifie and set iust at such time as you depart from the place where you are, as bound to any other place, whereof you de∣sire to inquire the longitude: during which time, your diligent care must be to preserue your watch in motion without inter∣mission: being at last arriued at the place whereof you inquire the longitude, you were best to stay till such time as the Index shall precisely point out some perfect houre: At the same in∣stant it must bee knowne by an Astrolabe, what houre it is at the place where you are arriued; for if your Astrolabe and Watch should both agree in one, you might assure your selfe that there is no difference of longitude betwixt the place whence you came, and the place whereto you are arriued: For it is euident that in this sort your iourney hath beene either directly North or directly South vnder the same Meridian. But if this differ either in houres or minutes, they must be reduced vnto degrees in such sor as we haue shewed in the former way. Through which you may finde out the Longitude which you desire to know: This inuention is by our Countryman Blundeuill ascri∣bed to Gemma Frisius ; although I should take it to bee more an∣cient: but whose inuention soeuer it was, certainly it cannot but commend the Authour. Peter Martyr in his Decades, seemes to preferre this way before all the rest; neuerthelesse in this I cannot assent to his opinion, being one I had rather trust as an Historian, then as a iudicious Cosmographer: because the way cannot but admit of great vncertainty: in so much as a Watch or Clocke will moue inequally, being corrupted with rust, especially on the Sea, which alwayes abounds with moist va∣pours: wherefore on the Sea, some haue thought an Houre-glasse more conuenient, which is true in comparison of the Watch; but neither will the sands of an houre-glasse keepe al∣waies the like motion: If any certainty may bee this way, it must bee by the helpe of the Automaton or perpetuall moueable, of whose inuention we may sooner despaire then of finding out this conclusion. 3 By the distance betwixt the Moone and some knowne Starre, which is situate neere the Eclip∣ticke, the Longitude may be found out. This way was taught by Appian, illustrated by Gemma Frisi∣us and Blundeuill, to whose manner of explication, wee haue for farther illustration added a figure of the Parallax where∣on this inuention is grounded. First then to shew this conclu∣sion, wee must first lay this ground: that the Distances betwixt the Moone and other starres in the firmament are varied accor∣ding to the difference of places: In so much as two men liuing farre distant in diuers places of the earth, beholding at one time the Moone and some other knowne fixt starre, will not finde the like distance betwixt them: whereof if any man doubt, he may be informed by this figure. Wee will imagine O to be the place of the Moone, as seated in the lower Orbe; G to bee the place of the fixt starre, whose distance from the Moone is inquired: E and F two stations and habitations of men dwelling on the earth, whereof wee may imagine the one to bee in Europe, the other in America: It will be manifest that the inhabitant situ∣ate in F will behold the Moone in the point B; and the said fixt starre in G: (because as the Optickes teach vs, all things are seene in the places opposite to the eye) so that the distance be∣twixt the Moone and the said starre, will bee the Arch of the greatest Circle BG of the other side: the inhabitants situate in E, will behold the Moone by the ray EC in C. as like∣wise the said fixt starre G in the point G, by the ray EG: so that the distance betwixt the Moone and the fixt starre, will bee in that station the Arch of the circle CG. Now by the first common Axiome of Euclide, euery man must grant that the Arch of BG is greater then CG, the former being the whole, and this the part. Secondly, out of the same ground, wee may as easily collect that this distance be∣twixt the Moone and some other knowne fixt starre is varied proportionally, according to the distances of the places on the earth, because so many places as there are, so many di∣uersity of aspects will arise, being increased or diminished, ac∣cording to the distances of places on the Terrestriall Globe: This conclusion thus demonstrated, wee must proceed to pra∣ctice in this manner, as is taught by Gemma Frisius: First, it behooueth you to search out by the helpe of Astronomicall Tables, the true motion of the Moone, according to the Longitude, at that time of your obseruation at some certaine place, for whose Meridian the rootes of those Tables are calculated. 2. You must know the Degree of Longitude of some fixed starre, nigh vnto the Eclipticke, either preceding or following the moouing of the Moone. 3. You must seeke out the Distance of moouing of the Moone, and the said starre. 4. The distance once had, apply the crosse-staffe to your sight, and so mooue the Crosse to and fro, till you may behold the Center of the Moone, at the one ende, and the fixed starre with the other. So shall you see expres∣sed by the Degrees and Minutes marked on the staffe the distance of the Moone and the said starre correspondent to the place of your obseruation: which being noted, set downe also the distance betwixt the Moone and the foresaid Starre which was first calculated. Then subtract the lesser from the greater, the residue will shew the least difference: which being diuided by the moouing which the Moone maketh in one houre, you shall know the time in which the Moone is or was ioyned with the first distance of the foresaid starre. Then hauing con∣uerted that time into degrees and minutes, the rest will be per∣formed either by addition or substraction of the Product there∣of to or from that Meridian: for which the Tables where by you first calculated the motion of the Moone, were appoin∣ted and verified. If the distance betwixt the Moone and the fixt Starre of your obseruation bee lesser, then must you adde the degrees and minutes to the knowne Latitude, so shall you finde the place of your obseruation to bee more Eastward. If it bee greater, then substract the degrees and minutes from the knowne Longitude, and the place of your obseruation in this regard will bee more Westward. These rules are so farre true that the Moone bee supposed to bee more Westward then the fixed Starre: for if otherwise, your working must be cleane con∣trary: to wit, if the distance betwixt the Moone and the fixed Starre bee lesser, you must subtract the degrees and minutes from the knowne Longitude: so shall the place of your obser∣uation bee more Westward: but if it bee greater, then must you adde the degrees and minutes vnto the knowne Longitude, and the place of your obseruation shall bee sound Eastward. This way, though more difficult, may seeme better then all the rest: for as much as an Eclipse of the Moone seldome happens, and a watch, clocke, or houreglasse cannot so well bee preserued, or at least so well obserued in so long a voyage: wherea euery night may seeme to giue occasion to this experiment: if so bee the ayre bee freed from clouds, and the Moone shew her face aboue the Horizon. 4 By the obseruation of the difference in the Sunnes and Moones motion, the Longitude of places may be found out. To explane this proposition, wee will set downe three things. 1 Certaine Postulata, or granted Axioms. 2 The example. 3. The manner and practise: The grounds or propositions which wee take as granted of all Mathematicians are these. 1 That the motion of the Moone is 48 minutes of an houre slower in 24 houres, or 360 degrees, then that of the Sunne. 2 That by ob∣seruation of the heauens, and other Mathematicall helpes, an Artificer may know in any place first the Meridian: Secondly the houre of the day: Thirdly the time of the Moones com∣ming to the Meridian. 3 The time of the Moones comming to the Meridian may bee knowne by an Ephemerides: These things granted, wee will suppose for example, that in London the Moone on some set day comes to the Meridian at foure of the Clocke after Noone: 2▪ That in some part of the West-Indies, the Moone bee obserued to come to the Meridian the same day at 10 minutes after foure. These grounds thus set downe, the distance of Longitude of that place Westward from London may bee found out. The manner of practise is thus to bee wrought by the golden Rule. If the difference of the Sunnes and Moones motion bee 48 minutes of an houre in 360 degrees, what will it be in 10 minutes? The fourth proportionall num∣ber will bee 75 degrees, the distance of Longitude of the place assigned from London, in West Longitude; from which number the Longitude from London being subtracted, and the remainder from 360, the residue will shew the Longitude. If the Moone in the place assigned come sooner to the Meridian, wee must count so much in East Latitude. This way I first found in M r ▪ Purchas his relation of Halls discouery of Groenland, written by William Baffin since this Chapter came vnder the Presse: the expression of which, being as I suppose shorter and easier then in the Author, I doe owe for the most part to my worthy Chamber-fellow, M r. Nathanael Norrington, to whose learned conference, I confesse my selfe to owe some fruits of my labours in this kinde, and all the offices of friendship. This manner of inuention, for mine owne part, I preferre before all the rest, both for certainty and facility and (as it should seeme by Baffins practise) it is more in vse amongst Marriners then the former, howsoeuer lesse mentioned amongst writers. 14 Thus much for the Inuention of the Longi∣tude: the Expression is the imitation of the Longitude on the face of an Artificiall Globe or Mappe; which is directed by these Rules. 1 The place whereof wee desire to know the Lon∣gitude being brought to the Brasen Meridian, the degrees of the Equatour will shew the Longitude. This Rule may easily be explaned by these three precepts. First that you must turne round the Globe on his Axell-tree, till you bring the place whereof seek the Longitude vnder the bra∣sen Meridian. 2 You must diligently and exactly marke what degree the Meridian cuts in the Equatour. 3. You must num∣ber how many degrees that point is distant from the first Meri∣dian, and the number will giue you the true Longitude sought after This also m y be performed without turning of the Globe, if so be any other Meridian in the globe signed out shall passe by the said place. For this Meridian will cut the Equatour in some degree or other, which being numbred▪ as before from the first Meridian, will shew the direct Longitude: the like of which we haue in the second case. 2 The Meridian running through any place of the Geographicall Table, will point and designe out in the Equatour the degrees of Longi∣tude. This may easily bee taught by the former way performed on the Globe: as for example, if I should inquire the Longitude of Paris the Metropolis of France, in a Geographicall Map, I finde a Meridian markt out which runs, if not directly through yet ve∣ry neere the said City. This Meridian I trace along to the Sou∣therne part, till I finde it to meet and cut the Equatour. Then obserue I in what degree of the Equatour it makes his interse∣ction, and I finde it to bee 23 degrees 20 minutes, which is the Longitude of the place. 15 Hauing spoken of the Longitude, the La∣titude comes in the next place to bee hand∣led: the Latitude is the Distance of any place from the Equatour, either North or South. What we haue spoken of the Longitude must also agree to the Latitude, that it is taken sometimes absolutely and generally, sometimes specially: in the former sense it signifies any di∣stance or space betweene North and South, or contrariwise from South to North. Amongst the Ancients was the bre dth or Latitude held to bee about 80 degrees, so that the vtmost bound or limit to it Northward was called Thule, which com∣monly is supposed to bee Island. But the latter Nauigatours through their diligence haue detected so much land that it is found to stretch beyond 81 degrees toward the North, and 45 toward the South, and much farther if we will beleeue the re∣lation of Ferdinand de Quir, a Spaniard, who boasts a more ample discouery of the South I dies, then euer before hath beene knowne. But howsoeuer, the Latitude here define is taken in a more speciall and stricter sense for the distance of any place from the equinoctiall line, bee it either toward the North or the South. The bound therefore from which we begin our account of Latitude is the Equatour: but the subiect wherein it is measured is the Meridian: so that it is cleane opposite to the Longitude, for that was limited by the Meridian, and mea∣sured in the Equatour. The Latitude of a place is alwayes e∣quall to the Eleuation of the Pole, as wee shall shew hereafter, and is diuided into the Northerne and the Southerne Latitude, whereof the one is from the Equatour Northward, the other Southward. 16 Concerning the Latitude are to bee conside∣red the Inuention, and the Expression: the In∣uention is againe twofold, Astronomicall or Magneticall. 17 The Astronomicall Inuention of the Latitude is by obseruation of the Starres, which is directed by these Propositions. 1 The Meridian Height of the Sunne at the time of the Equinoctiall subtracted from 90 degrees, will shew the true Latitude of the place. The height of the Sunne at Noone may be found by the Astro∣labe, Crosse-staffe; Quadrant, and many other Astronomicall instruments, but in taking the Meridian Altitude, it is very fit and requisite that it bee obserued diuerse times one after ano∣ther with some little space betwixt, to trie whether it increas∣eth or decreaseth; for if it doth increase; then assure your selfe it is not full Noone; if it decrease it is past Noone: hauing thus found out the Meridian Altitude, you must subduct it from 90 degrees, and the residue will bee the true Latitude of the place, if so bee it bee obserued at the time of the Equinoctiall, when the Sunne enters the first point of Aries, or Libra as for example here at Oxford I obserue the Meridian height of the Sunne about the eleuenth of March, and I finde it to bee about 37 degrees, or thereabout, which I subtract out of 90, the whole Quadrant, and the residue will bee 51½, which is the Latitude of the place. But if you would know the Latitude at any other day, or time of the yeere, then must you proceed in this manner: hauing taken the height of the Sunne at Noone (as before) you must by the Table of Declination learne the true degree of the Sunnes declination. 2 If such declination bee Northernely, then must you subtract it from the foresaid Alti∣tude or height. But if Southernly, you must adde it to the Alti∣tude: and by such addition and subtraction, shall you haue the height of the equinoctiall aboue the Horizon. 3 This height of the Equinoctiall aboue your Horizon, being as before sub∣tracted from 90, will bee the true Latitude of the place assig∣ned: as for example, the 15 of August I obserue the Declinati∣on of the Sunne to bee about 10 Degrees, the Sunne being in 2 Degrees of Virgo: I finde the Meridian height of the Sunne to be 48 degrees or thereabouts▪ Now because the Sunne being in Virgo, hath a Northerne Declination, I subtract 10, which is the number of the declination, out of 48 the height of the Sunne, and there will remaine 38, which againe taken ut of 90, the residue will be about 52, the common receaued Latitude of the place. 2 The Meridian height of any Starre, the De∣clination subtracted, if it bee Northerne, or added if it bee Southerne, being subtracted out of 90, will shew at any time of the yeere the Degrees of Latitude. The former rule serues onely for the day; because it is perfor∣med by the obseruation of the Sunne, but this latter may bee more necessary for Marriners, who now and then are inforced to inquire the Latitude of a place in the night when the Sunne shines not: wherfore they must flie vnto some knowne Starre, by obseruation of which they may easily performe the same; ac∣cording to the rule: which differres nothing at all from that which wee speake of the Sunne out of the Equinoctiall, and therefore need no other exposition then a bare example: let the fixt starre you best know, bee Arcturus, whose Meridian Al∣titude you finde by your Mathematicall instrument to bee 59 Degrees, and 30 minutes: then shall you learne by some Ta∣ble that this Declination Northward is 21 degrees, 30 minutes: now because his declination is Northward, you must subtract it out of his Meridian Altitude, and you shall finde the remain∣der to bee 52 Degrees, which is the Latitude for the place: as it is commonly taken, although I confesse it might be more exact: being obserued here at Oxford, be found rather 51 Degrees and 30 minutes. 18 The Magneticall Inuention is performed by the Magneticall Inclinatory Needle. The ground of this Magneticall inuention is from the propor∣tion betwixt the magneticall inclinatory Needle, and the La∣titude of the Earth: for as wee haue proued in the 13 Proposi∣tion of the 3 Chapter; the Magneticall inclinatory Needle will at euery point of Latitude conforme it selfe to certaine An∣gles with the Axell of the Earth proportionally to the De∣grees of that Latitude: vpon which grounds D r Ridley hath inuented a curious instrument to finde out the Latitude for a∣ny place assigned, and for this vse hath calculated Tables, which wee hope will bee inlarged by our famous Professor M r Brigges: for my part, hauing neuer seene this instrument, such time as I shall haue occasion to acquaint my selfe with it. 19 The Expression is the imitation of it on the artificiall Spheare: which is againe either Astronomicall or Magneticall. The former is performed by the ordinary Globe accor∣ding to this rule. 1 The point of any place or Citty first found in the Globe being brought to the brasen Me∣ridian, will shew in the Degrees of the same Meridian the true Latitude of the same place. This may easily be shewed in this manner by an example; If I would willingly finde out the Latitude of Oxford in the Globe. I first finde out the place in the Globe, which hauing found, I turne the Globe till I haue brought the place iust vnder the brasen Meridian: then I note what degree it designes, and that shewes mee the true Latitude of the place, which I finde to bee 52, or thereabouts: but if you would finde it in a Mappe or Chart, in which there is no such brasen Meridian, you must take the Parallell of the place, or at least the next vnto it, pointed in the same Mappe: Then note what degree the said Parallell cuts in the first Meridian; for that will shew the true Latitude of it by the right Parallell of the place, if not the next; so that by additi∣on, or subtraction, you may easily guesse at it. 20 The Magneticall Expression depends from the Application of the Inclinatory Needle to the Terrella. The Magneticall inclinatory needle is said to conforme it selfe in the same manner to the Terrella or Loadstone, being artifi∣cially thereunto applied, as it doth to the great Globe of the Earth: so that no doubt is, but an imitation of the Latitude ¶ A Table expressing the proportion of the Magneticall Inclination to the degrees of Latitude, and Eleuation of the Pole. Eleuat. Poli. Inclination to the Hori∣zon. 1.11. Eleuat. Poli. Inclination to the Hori∣zon. 1.11. Eleuat. Poli. Inclination to the Hori∣zon. 0.1.11. 1 2 11 15 31 52 26 38 61 79 28 51 2 4 10 13 32 53 46 55 62 80 31 36 3 6 26 55 33 54 53 51 63 80 37 54 4 8 31 23 34 56 3 56 64 81 10 47 5 10 33 41 35 57 13 25 65 81 42 36 6 12 23 50 36 58 21 19 66 82 13 23 7 14 37 53 37 59 27 50 67 82 43 9 8 16 27 52 38 60 32 59 68 83 11 56 9 18 21 50 39 61 36 46 69 83 39 45 10 20 13 47 40 62 39 0 70 84 6 37 11 22 3 45 41 63 39 56 71 84 32 30 12 23 51 46 42 64 39 29 72 84 57 24 13 25 37 52 43 65 37 41 73 85 21 22 14 27 22 4 44 66 34 31 74 85 44 24 15 29 4 23 45 67 30 0 75 86 6 31 16 40 44 53 46 68 24 10 76 86 27 44 17 32 23 34 47 69 17 2 77 86 48 5 18 34 0 27 48 70 8 38 78 87 7 36 19 35 35 35 49 70 58 59 79 87 26 18 20 37 9 0 50 71 48 7 80 87 44 9 21 38 40 42 51 72 36 0 81 88 1 10 22 40 10 41 52 73 22 38 82 88 17 23 23 41 38 58 53 74 8 2 83 88 32 49 24 43 5 37 54 74 52 11 84 88 47 29 25 44 30 26 55 75 35 6 85 89 1 22 26 45 53 43 56 76 16 51 86 89 14 30 27 47 15 25 57 76 57 28 87 89 36 54 8 77 6 88 88 8 may bee expressed on the little earth, or loadstone: for which vse, diuers curious instruments haue beene deuised by magneti∣call Philosophers, to whom I referre my Readers: because I (as I said) haue little acquainted my selfe with the vse of such in∣struments. CHAP. XII. Of the distances of places compared one with another. 1 OF the simple and absolute distinction of distances, wee haue treated in the former Chapter: wee must in the last place handle it comparatiuely ; that is to say, one place compared with another: whereof wee are to consider the Inuention and Expression. 2 The distance is the measured space betwixt two places: which is, either vniforme, or various: vniforme is in places different, either in Longitude onely, or in Latitude onely. 3 Those places differ in Longitude onely, which are situate vnder the same or like Parallels, but diuers Meridians ; or at least vnder op∣posite points of the same Meridian. Of place differing onely in Longitude, there may bee three ca∣ses: For 1. they may be vnder the same Parallell, as the Iland of int Thomas, and Summatra, which lie directly vnder the Equatour; or Noremberg and Hamberg, which hauing very neere the same Latitude, differ in Longitude, and lie in the same Parallell without the Equatour. 2. They may be vnder the like Parallels, that is, in points equidistant from the Equatour. As Siene in Egypt, vnder the Tropicke of Cancer ; and Beach in the South continent, vnder the Tropicke of Capricorne. 3. They may be vnder the same Parallell and Meridian, but in opposite points of the said Parallell: such as are the Perioeci, spoken of in the 10. Chapter. 4 Places differing onely in Longitude, whose distance is here proposed to bee sought out, are seated in the same, or diuers Hemi∣spheares. 5 In the same Hemispheare, when both places haue either Easterne or Westerne Longitude. This againe may haue two cases; for either the places are vnder the Equatour, or with∣out it: in both which, the finding out of the distance shall bee opened in these Rules. 1 If two places vnder the Equatour in the same Hemispheare, differ in longitude: let the lesser longitude be subtracted from the greater, and the difference conuerted into Miles, and the di∣stance will be knowne. As for example, wee will suppose of two places, whose di∣stance is to bee sought out, the former to be the Iland of Saint Thomas in Africa, the other the Iland Summatra in the East Indies, both situate directly vnder the Equatour ; and there∣fore differing onely in Longitude. To expresse which, in this figure, let the first Meridian from which the Longi∣tude is to be mea∣sured, be ABCD: the place where Saint Thomas I∣land is seated, K: and the place of Summatra, F. Thē subtracting AK, the Longitude of Saint Thomas I∣land, being lesser, out of the Longi∣tude of Summatra AE, the residue KE will shew the distance in degre s: which being multiplied by 60, and so conuerted into Italian -miles, will shew how many miles the said places are distant the one from the other. As in this present example, wee finde the Lon∣gitude of Saint Thomas Iland to bee 32 degrees 20 minutes of Summatra, to bee 131 degrees: The lesser summe subducted from the greater; to wit, 32 degrees 20 minutes, out of 131; there will remaine 98 degrees 40 minutes: which being againe multiplied by 60, will produce 5920 Italian -miles, the true distance betwixt the said places. 2 Of two places in the same Hemispheare, situ∣ate without the Equatour; the distance may be knowne two wayes: either by the resoluti∣on of the Sphericall Triangle, or else by ta∣bles of the miles answerable to the degrees of Latitude. The former way is performed in this manner: Let the Tri∣angle of two equall sides FBG in the figure before, bee re∣solued; in which the two equall sides FB, and GB are the complements of equall Latitudes; to wit, AF, and EG. The Angle FBG is the difference of Longitude, which Angle, whether it bee a Right Angle, or Oblique Angle, will easily bee knowne, if by letting a perpendicular line BI from B to I it bee parted into two Triangles FBI and IBG: for because those two Triangles according to the grounds of Geometry are equall; the Arch IG in the Triangle IBG being found out, the Arch also IF in the Triangle FBI will also bee knowne: which beingthus demonstrated, wee must proceed in this manner, according to the Golden Rule. As the Right angle BIG is to the complement of the Latitude BG, so is IBG the middle difference of Longitude to IG the middle distance: Pitiscus in his Trigonometry to this addes another manner of de∣monstration, expressible by the precedent figure: let the per∣pendicular IB be continued vnto K, that BK may make a whole Quadrant. Now will the Triangle IHK haue Right Angles at I and K, at I by supposition, at K by his 57 proposition demonstra∣ted in his first booke: because, If a greater circle of the Spheare passe by the Poles of a greater cîrcle, it will cut it at right Angles, and contrariwise: wherefore the sides IH and KH must bee quadrants: because, as hee shewes in his 68 proposition of his first booke; In a sphericall Triangle hauing more then one Right Angle, the sides subtending those Right Angles are Quadrants: Finally, because the Arches GH and EH, are the complements of the Arches IG and KE: by the 9 definition of the first booke▪ For as much as of any Arch lesse then a Quadrant, the complement is that which wants to make it vp 90 parts. We may by the helpe of the 57 proportion of his first booke, seeke out the comple∣ment of the third side GH; which will be the Arch GI: which will shew vs the probleme which wee sought, by redu∣ducing it vnto the Table of signes, and Tangents, exactly se out by our forenamed Author and others. For an example of this, wee may take two famous cities of Germanie, Noremberg and Hamberg, which without any sensible difference haue the same Latitude, but differ in Longitude: For the Longitude of Noremberg is 31 degrees 45 minutes: of Hamberg 32 degrees 30 minutes: the difference of Longitude then is 0 degrees 45 minutes. These things supposed to be knowne, we will ima∣gine Noremberg to be in F, Hamberg in G▪ and therefore AF, or EG will haue 49 degrees 23 minutes: FB or GB will haue 40 degrees 37 minutes: FBG or AE will haue 0 degrees 45 minutes: KE 0 degrees 22 ½ minutes: EH 89 degrees 37 ½ mi∣nutes: if we worke by the Table of Signes, Tangent , and Se∣cants, the knowledge whereof is required to this Probleme. But because the former way may seeme difficult to such as are not much acquainted with Trigonometry, some haue set downe n easier way, depending on the vse of a Table, wherein i cal∣culated the number of miles answering to euery degree of eue∣ry Parallell of the Spheare: in which working▪ we ought to bee directed by this Rule: If two places without the Equatour differ in longitude only, subtract the lesser number out of the greater, and multiply it by the n mber of miles answerable to a d gree of that Parallell, nd the product will giue the distance. As for exampl , if you would know the distance betwixt London and Antwerpe, which haue in a manner the same Latitude, but differ in Longi∣tude: I finde them to differ in Longitude by 6 degrees, which number being multiplied by 37 miles answerable to 51 degrees of Latitude, these will arise to 247 miles, and 54 seconds of a mile. A Table of Miles answerable to one Degree of euery seuerall Latitude. 1 2 3 4 5 6 D M S D M S D M S D M S D M S D M S 1 59 59 16 57 41 3 51 26 46 41 41 61 29 5 76 14 31 2 59 58 17 57 23 32 50 53 47 40 55 62 28 10 77 13 30 3 59 55 18 57 4 33 50 19 48 40 9 63 27 14 78 12 28 4 59 51 19 56 4 34 49 45 49 9 22 64 26 18 79 11 27 5 59 4 20 56 23 35 49 9 50 38 34 65 25 21 80 10 25 6 59 40 21 56 1 36 48 32 51 37 46 66 24 24 81 9 23 7 59 33 22 55 38 37 47 55 52 36 56 67 23 27 82 8 21 8 59 25 23 55 14 38 47 17 53 36 7 68 22 29 83 7 19 9 59 16 24 54 49 39 46 38 54 35 6 69 21 30 84 6 16 10 59 5 25 54 23 40 45 58 55 34 25 70 20 31 85 5 14 11 58 54 26 53 6 41 45 17 56 33 33 71 19 32 86 4 11 12 58 41 27 53 28 42 44 35 57 32 41 72 18 32 87 3 8 13 58 2 28 52 59 43 43 53 58 31 48 73 17 33 88 2 5 14 58 13 29 52 29 44 43 10 59 30 54 74 16 32 89 1 3 15 57 57 30 51 58 45 42 26 60 30 0 75 15 32 90 0 0 6 The distance of places differing only in Lon∣gitude in diuerse Hemispheares is found out by this rule. 1 Let the greater longitude be subtracted from the whole circle, and vnto the residue added the lesser longitude, there will arise the distance betwixt those places. As for example, Lisbone in Spayne hath in East longitude 13 de∣grees: and Cap de Los Slanos in America, hath in West longi∣tude 334 degrees: to know the distance betwixt those places, you must first subduct 334, which is the greater Longitude out of 360 the whole circle, and there will remaine 26 Degrees, to which if wee adde the East longitude of Lisbone, which is 13 degrees, it will make 39 degrees, which is the true difference of those longitudes: which being multiplied by the Number of miles in the Table going before, answerable to the latitude of the said places (if they differ only in longitude) there will arise the number of miles contained in the Distance. 7 Distant places which differ onely in latitude, are such as lye vnder the same Meridian, but di∣uerse Parallells: These are supposed to be either in One, or in Diuerse latitudes or Hemispheres. 8 In One, when both the places haue either North latitude, or both South Latitude: The finding out of which distances depends on these Propositions. 1 If the latitude of each place be towards the same P le, subtract the lesser from the greater lati∣tude, and the residue conuert into miles. The reason may bee explained in this Figure: wee will imagine EF to bee the lesser, EG the greater la∣titude. There will remaine an Arch of the Meridian FG: which being multi∣plied by 60 (being part of a great circle, will make the nūber of miles answerable, to that distance. For an example we will take two Citties of England, Oxford and Yorke. The latitude Oxford, we take to be 31 degrees 30 minutes: of Yorke 54 degrees 30 minutes. The lesser latitude subtracted from the greater, there will remaine three degrees, which being multiplied by 60, will render 180 Italian -miles, the Distance of thse two places. 2 If two places in latitude only distant, be situate in diuerse kindes of latitude, adde the latitude of the one to the other, and the whole summe shall be the distance. As for example, in the former Diagram, imagining as in the former case BD to be the Meridian of those distant places, and AC the Equatour, we will suppose the one place to bee situate towards the North Pole, as G, the other towards the South, as in H: then as appeares by sense, will the distance bee the Arch of the Meridian GH, whereof GE, and EH, are parts, whereof it is compounded: wherefore it must needs follow that those parts added together make the whole distance: for example we will take Bellograde in Europe, and the Cape of good hope in Afri∣ca, which haue neere the same longitude, to wit, 48 degrees 30 minutes: but they differ in latitude in such sort, as the former hath of the Northerne latitude 44 degrees 30 Minutes; the o∣ther of Southerne latitude about 35 degrees 30 minutes. These two numbers added together, will make 80 degrees, which be∣ing multiplied by 60 will produce 4800 miles the distance of those places. 9 Hitherto of the distances of places which are Vniforme, that is to say, of such as differ either only in longitude, or onely in latitude : wee are next to consider of such distances as are vari∣ous, wherein the places differ both in longitude and latitude. 10 The Inuention of such a distance, may bee performed two wayes, either Abstractiuely by the resolution of Triangles, or else Mechanically by instruments. The former againe may bee two wayes, either by the Right-line Triangle, or by the Sphericall : The inuention of the di∣stance by the Rigt-line Triangle depends on these following Propositions declaring two wayes of inuention. 11 The first is by a Rectangle Triangle barely considered by it selfe, according to this Theo∣reme. 1 The square Root of the number made of the diffe∣rences of longitude and latitude of two places di∣stant, will shew the distance of those places. The ground of this Proposition is taken from the 27 Proposition of the first booke of Euclide : where it is demonstrated that the square of the Hypotenusa, or greatest side of a Rectangle Trian∣gle is equall to the two squares made of the two other sides: which being well vnders ood, will lend an easie light to this pro∣position. To performe which we must first take the difference of longitude, which is imagined to make one side of this Triangle. Then wee must obserue also the difference of latitude, which is supposed to make another side. Then are we sure by the former Proposition of Euclide that the squares of these two sides, are e∣quall to the square of the Hypotenus , or third side; which is to be sought out, and expresses the distance betwixt those places: wherfore we must first multiply these two sides in themselues, whence they will become squares. 2. We must adde them toge∣ther. 3 We must out of the totall extract the quadrat root, which will shew the distance: as suppose according to this Figure, two Cities d stant and differing both in longitude and latitude: wher∣of the one shall haue in longitude 21 degrees, in latitude 58: the other is supposed to haue in longitude 26 degrees, in latitude 52. Here first I subtract the lesse lon∣gitude out of the greater, to wit, 21 out of 26, and the residue will bee 5, which I suppose to be one side of the Rectangle Triangle. Then likewise I subtract the lesse latitude as 52 out of 58, the residue will be 6, which I make the other side of my Triangle, which done, I multiplie 6 in it selfe, and it makes 36, which is the square of one side: Then I multiply 5 in it selfe, and the product will be 25, the square on the other side. These two squares added together by the foresaid Proposition must be equall to the square of the Hypo∣teneus ▪ orthird side 61, whereof the square root being extracted, will shew the side it selfe, which will be 7 7/25 which is the di∣stance: If any man desire to know this distance according to miles, he must reduce the degrees of longitude and latitude into miles according to our former rules, before he begin to worke: because (as wee haue shewed) the degrees of longitude being measured in the Parallells are not alwayes equall, the Parallels being somewhere great r, somewhere lesser. This way must needs bee more exact, in that a Mile is a smaller part then a De∣gree, and (as Pitiscus notes) the Fractions which fall out in ex∣traction of roots can hardly bee reduced to any proportion. Ne∣uerthelesse this way of finding out the distance by a Right-line Triangle, howsoeuer common and receaued, is very vnperfect and subiect to great errour, especially in places far distant: for as much as it supposeth the Meridians with the Parallels on the Globe to make true squares, whereas indeed all the Meridians meet in the pole, and so by consequence cannot make true squares: But yet this errour is far lesse in a lesser distance; be∣cause in a small space of earth, the roundnesse and conuexity of the Earth is insensible, or at least of very small importance: so that this way cannot be altogether vnusefull. 12 Another is found out more exact then the former by the tables of Signes, Tangents, and Secants. This is performed by finding out the numbers: whereof the former is called Inuen∣tum primum, or the first found number. The se∣cond Inuentum secundum, or the second found number. The working of which Probleme depends on these rules. 1 Multiply the Right Signe of the difference of the longitude into the summe of the complement of the lesser latitude, and diuide the product of that multiplication by the totall summe, & then by the rules of Signes and Tangents the Arch of that Quotient found out will giue the first found number. 2 Multiply the right signe of the lesser latitude by the totall signe, and hauing diuided the product thereof by the signe of the complement of the first number, subtract the Arch of that quotient out of the greater latitude which giues the second found number. 3 Then multiply the signe of the complement of the first found number into the signe of the complement of the second found number, and hauing diuided the product by the Totall Signe, Let the Arch of the quotient be sought out by the Tables, which Arch subtracted out of the whole quadrant, will giue the degrees of a distance in a great circle. To expresse the practice and manner of working according to our former Rules, we will suppose the two cities, whose di∣stance is here sought out to be Ierusalem and Norimberge in Ger∣many. Ierusalem hath in longitude 66. degrees. 0 min. and in latitude 31 degrees, 40. minutes. Againe Norimberge hath in longitude 28. degrees. 20. minutes, and in latitude 49 deg. 40. min. The difference of their longitude is 37. deg. 40. minutes. The right signe whereof is 36664: (for here wee make 60000 to be the totall signe, rejecting the two last figures on the right hand in the tables of Regiomontanus. ) Now you must multiply 36664: into the signe of the Complement of the lesser latitude, which is 51067: the product of which two signes being multi∣plied the one by the other, there will arise 1872320488: which if you diuide by the totall signe 60000, the quotient will giue you 31205, whose Arch is 31 deg. 20 min. and this must be your first found Number. For the finding of the second Number, you must proceede in this māners: Multiply the right signe of the lesser latitude, which is 31498 by the totall signe 60000, and the produ t will bee 1889880000: which summe, if wee diuide by the signe of the Complement of the first-found Number, which is 51249, wee shall finde in the quotient 36876; the Arch whereof is 37 de∣grees, 55 min: which Arch subtracted out of the greater lati∣tude, there will remaine 11 degrees, 29 min: and this is our se∣cond-found Number. These things thus supposed to bee found out, wee must multiply the fore-said signe of the Complement of the first-found Number, which is 58798, and the product will arise to 3013338702, the Arch whereof is 56 deg. 50 min: which being subtracted out of the whole quadrant, viz: 90 de∣grees, there will remaine 33 degrees, 10 min: of the greater circle. These 33 degrees if we multiply by 60, there will arise 1980 miles, whereunto if we finde the 10 miles answerable to the 10 min. wee shall finde the distance betwixt these places to be 1990 Italian-miles. This example is vsed by Appian, and wrought according to his owne Tables, and farther explained by our countryman Blundeuill in his Exercises. The same way of working hath been deliuered by Clauius, Iunctinus, and others, although not according to the same Tables. This was of measu∣ring the distance by the Signes and Tangents according to these Authors, may be warranted more exact than the other, because it admits of smaller parts in the calculation; yet will it come far short of truth. 10 Another way of finding out the Distances of places, differing both in longitude & latitude, is by the Resolution of a Sphericall triangle. This way of all the rest must needs be most certaine: for as much as this kind of triangle best expresseth the sections of the Globe. The methode of which working I finde no-where better taught then in Pitiscus his Trigonometry: of whose ingenious industry notwithstanding little vse can bee made, except the Learner first acquaint himself with his principles, because in his Geographicall Problemes, he briefely referres his Reader to his former grounds and Axiomes, accurately demonstrated in his former books: For mine owne part it might perhaps seeeme as absurd in this Trea∣tise, to intermixe all his preparatory demonstrations, being meerely Geometricall, and without the limites of my subject, as by leauing out so necessary a way to mangle my discourse. Wher∣fore intending a middle way, I will (God-willing) in such sort set downe these propositions, that I may giue some light to this excellent inuention, and referre my Reader to Pitiscus his Axi∣omes for farther Demonstration. 14 The Distances proposed to be measured by Sphericall triangles, admit of two cases: 1 When two places are so situate, that the one is vnder the Equatour, the other without. Secondly, when both are without the Equa∣tour. 15 The former againe is three-fold: For either the difference of longitude betwixt those pla∣ces is Equall to a quadrant, or Lesse, or Grea∣ter. The seuerall wayes of inuention on shall bee directed by these Rules. 1 If the Difference of longitude be Equall to a qua∣drant, the distance will also be a quadrant. As for example in this present figure wee will imagine the circle ABCD to bee the first Meridian: the places whose di∣stance is sought out A and G: whose Distance AG will bee a quadrant. For A will be a pole of a Greater Circle BGD, by the 56 prop. of the 1 of Pitiscus: wherefore all the Arches drawne from thence to BGD will bee quadrants by the same propositi∣on. For a more familiar instance wee will take the Iland Suma∣tra, which hath in longitude 131 degrees, but no latitude, be∣ing sited vnder the Equatour: and the city Buda the Metropolis of Hungary, which hath in longitude 41 degrees, in latitude 47 degrees; The difference of longitude is 90 degrees; for 41 be∣ing subducted out of 131, there will remaine 90, wherefore the distance betwixt those places will be 90, which being multipli∣ed by 60, will produce 5400 Italian-miles. 2 If the difference of longitude bee lesse then a qua∣drant as AF: the Triangle AEF here is to bee resolued into his parts, according to the 4 th Axi∣ome of Pitiscus. As for example the places, whose longitude is here sought out, shall be A and F; The Triangle here to be knowne is AEF; whose Resolution depends on our Authors 4 th Axiome. For the Diffe∣rence of longitude is ABF; because the measure of a Sphericall Triangle being taken in a great circle, is an Arch of a greater circle, described from the Angular point, and comprehended be∣twixt the two legges of the Triangle so farre as a quadrant, as is taught in the 58 proposition of his first Booke. For a more speci∣all instance we will take two places; whereof the one shall bee the Iland of S. Thomas before mentioned, which hath in longi∣tude 32 degrees and 20 minutes. The other Amsterdam in Hol∣land, which hath in longitude 26 degrees, 30 minutes. The for∣mer we imagine in A; the later in F. The Difference of longi∣tude ABF will be 5 degrees, 50 min: Then the distance sought out must be AF: so working according to the fourth Axiome of Pitiscus, we shall find the Arch AF, which is the distance, to be 54 degrees, 19 minutes. 3 If the Difference of longitude bee greater then a quadrant, as of the two places of F and C, the Triangle to bee resolued will bee FCE, being a Rectangle at E. Here because the Triangle FCE hath his two sides FC, and EC, greater then quadrants, insteed of it you may worke on the Triangle AEF, adioyned to the Triangle FEC: and the whole worke will be dispatched: for by the resolution of the Triangle AEF, you shall find out the Arch FG, which being added to the quadrant CG, there will be produced the Arch FC, which is to be ought out. As for example, we will imagine Heidelberge as it were placed at F, to haue in longitude 30 degrees, 45 mi∣nutes, in latitude 49 degrees 35 min: Then wee will suppose Summatra, as placed at C, to haue in longitude 131 degrees, but no latitude: The difference of longitude will be EC, of 100 de∣grees, 15 minutes: and the complement AE 79 degrees, 45 minutes. Then working according to the Rules of Trigonome∣try, we shall find the signe of the Arch FC, to be 6 degrees, 37 ½ minutes; which being added to FC, being 90 degrees, will pro∣duce 96 degrees, 37 ½ minutes, to which Arch there will ans∣wer 1449 German-miles. 16 The second Case is, when both places are si∣tuate without the Equatour: This is againe twofold: For either the two places are vn∣derstood to be situate towards the same Pole, or else one place toward the Northerne, the other towards the Southerne Pole. Both which Cases shall be taught in these Rules. 1 If both places whose distance is sought, be situate towards the same Pole, there will arise a Trian∣gle, whose sides and Angles will be knowne by the fourth Axiome of Pitiscus in Trigonometry the fourth Booke. As for example, in this present figure, let the two places giuen bee FG, the Triangle to bee knowne, will be FBG, whose a∣cute Angle will be at B. Let the places giuen bee as FH; the Tri∣angle to bee re∣solued & known will bee FBH, hauing a right Angle at H. Fi∣nally, if the pla∣ces suppos ed to be giuen, are as FI, the Triangle to bee knowne will bee FBI, with an obtuse Angle at I. 2 If the one place be situated towards the North-pole, and the other towards the South-pole, there will arise a Triangle, whereof the one side about the Angle which is giuen, will be greater then a quadrant. As in the former figure, let the places giuen be as G and K, al∣so H and K, also I and K: There will still fall out a Triangle▪ whose one side containing the Angle giuen, will be greater then a quadrant, as BK: wherefore for the side BK, you must take his complement to the Semi-circle BF, that is, for the Triangle GBK, you must worke by the Triangle GBF: and insteed of the Triangle HBK, you must take the Triangle HBF: and for the Triangle IBK, you must worke by the Triangle IBF, ac∣cording to the fourth Axiome of the fourth booke of Pitiscus, to which I had rather referre my Reader, then intermixe our Geographicall discourse with handling the Principles of Geome∣try, which here are to be supposed so many precedent propositi∣ons; which, expressed as they ought, would transcend the bounds of my intended journey. 17 Of the Astractiue way of finding out the Di∣stance of places, we haue spoken: The Me∣chanicall depends on the vse of Instruments and Mechanicall operation, whereof wee will shew one way in this Theoreme. 1 By the working with a Semi-circle, the Di∣stance of two places may be found out. This inuention by M r Blundeuill, seemes to be ascribed to Ed∣ward Wright, yet hath it beene taken vp of forreine Writers as their owne, and vsed in their Charts and Mappes. The manner of operation is thus: First, let there be drawne a semi-circle vpon a right Diameter signed out, will be the letters ABCD, where∣of D shall be the center, as you find it deciphered in this present figure. The greater this Semi-circle be made, so much the more easie will be the operation; because the degrees will be larger. Then this Semi-circle being drawne, and accordingly diuided, imagine that by the helpe of it, you desire to find out the distance betwixt London and Ierusalem, which cities are knowne to di∣ffer both in longitude and latitude. Now, that the true distance betwixt these two places may bee found out, you must first sub∣tract the lesser longitude out of the greater, so shall you finde the Difference of their longitudes, which is 47 degrees. Then rec∣kon that Difference vpon the Semi-circle, beginning at A, and so proceed to B; and at the end of that Difference, make a marke with the letter E, into which point by your Ruler, let a right line be drawne from D the center of the Semi-circle. This being in this sort performed, let the lesser latitude be sought out, which is 32 degrees in the foresaid Semi-circle, beginning your accompt from the point E, and so proceeding towards B, and at the end of the lesser latitude, let another point bee marked out with the letter G: from which point let there be drawne a per∣pendicular, which may fall with right Angles vpon the former line, drawne from D to E; and where it chanceth to fall, there marke out a point with the letter H: This being performed, let the greater latitude, which is 51 degrees, 32 minutes, be sought out in the Semi-circle, beginning to reckon from A towards B, and at the end of that latitude, set downe another point, signed out by the letter I: from whence let there bee drawne another perpendicular line, that may fall with right Angles vpon the Diameter AC, and here marke out a point with the letter K: This done, take with your Compasse the distance betwixt K and H; which distance you must set downe vpon the Diameter AC, placing the one foote of your compasse vpon K, and the other towards the center D, and there marke out a point with the let∣ter L: Then with your compasse take the shorter perpendicular line GH, and apply that widenesse vpon the longer perpendicu∣lar line IK, placing the one foot of your compasse at I, which is the bounds of the great latitude, and extend the other towards K, and there make a point at M. Then with your compasse take the distance betwixt L and M, and apply the same to the semi∣circle, placing the one foot of your compasse in A, and the other towards B, and there marke out a point with the letter N. Now the number of degrees comprehended betwixt A and N, will expresse the true distance of the two places, which will be found to be 39▪ degrees: which being multiplyed by 60, and so con∣uerted into miles according to our former Rules, will produce 2340, which is the distance of the said places. 17 The expression of the Distance of two places may be performed either by the Globe or Map according to these Rules. 1 The distance betwixt two places in the Globe, be∣ing obserued by the quadrant of Altitude, and ap∣plied to the degrees of the Equatour, or any great circle, will shew how many miles such places are distant. The practise hereof is very easie, as shall be taught in this ex∣ample: we wil for instance take Tolledo in the middest of Spaine, and the Cape of Good Hope in the South Promontory of all Afri∣ca: The space taken by a quadrant of Altitude, or any threed ap∣plyed to the Equatour, will be found to bee about 82 degrees, which being multiplyed by 60, and so conuerted into miles, will render 4920, the true distance betwixt these two places. 2 The distance betwixt any two places in the Chart, obserued by a compasse, and applyed to the degrees of a greater Circle, will shew how many miles such places are distant one from the other. For an example, we will take the city Seuill on the Southmo part of Spaine, and Bilbao on the North -side: the space betwixt those places being taken with a thre d or a compasse, and apply∣ed to one of the greater Circles, will containe about 6 degrees; which being multiplyed by 60, and so conuerted into Italian -miles, will produce 360: and so many miles those Cities are to be esteemed distant the one from the other. The end of the first Booke. The Analysis of the second Booke. Generall, which of a place generally taken, without any speciall di∣uision handles the Adiuncts and proprie∣ties: these agree to a place in respect of the Earth it selfe: which are Internall or Externall: Common or Magneticall, whereof Chapter 2. Heauens: which are Generall or Speciall. Chapt. 3. Expression and Manner of Description of Regions, aswell in the finding out the Angle of position, as Translation of places formerly found out into the Globe or Chart. Chap. 4. Speciall, which contains the distinctio of a place into Sea: whose description is called Hydrography, in which we are to con∣sider the Adiuncts of the Sea, which are either Internall, which are in∣bred in the Nature of the Sea; which againe are either Absolute, such as agree to the Sea without any comparison of it with the Land: Here we ob∣serue in the water of the Sea 1 The Figure, and Quality. Chap. 5. 2 The Motion, Naturall and Violent. Chap. 6. Comparatiue, which concerne the Depth, Situation, and Termination of the Sea. Chap. 7. Externall, which concerne Sea-Trafficke and Marchandize. Chap. 8. Land, which we terme Pedography, whose Accidents are either Naturall, which are a∣gaine diuided into Perpetuall, such as ordi∣narily agree to the earth: these againe are either Absolute, wherein we haue no respect vnto the Sea: Here we consi∣der the Nature 1 Of riuers, fountaines, and lake . Chap. 9. 2 Of mountaines, vallie , and plaine-Regions, woody, and champion Countreyes. Chap. 10. Comparatiue wherein we consider the Termination of the Sea with the Land. Chap. 11. Casuall, which seldome fall out, such as are Inundations and Earth-quakes. Chap. 12. Ciuill, which concernes the Inhabitants of any place, in whom we con∣sider the Originall or off-spring. Chap. 13. Disposition which is varied, either accor∣ 1 Site in respect of the Heauens. Chap. 14. 2 Soyle. Chap. 15. GEOGRAPHIE: THE SECOND BOOKE. CHAP. I. Of Topographie and the nature of a place. I N the former Treatise, by Gods assistance, wee haue treated of the Sphericall part of Geographie : It will in the second place seeme conueni∣ent to speake of the Topicall part of it. 2 The Topicall part teacheth the description of the Terrestriall Globe, so farre forth as it is di∣uided into places. The nature of Topographie, whereof we are to treat in this se∣cond part, is discouered vnto vs, not only in the name, which promiseth a description of places, but also in the differences set downe by Ptolomy himselfe, betwixt the Sphericall and To∣picall part: the former of which hee cals Geographie, and lat∣ter Topographie ; whereof wee haue spoken at large in the first Chapter of our former booke. Here onely wee will note this one distinction, that T ograhie may bee t ken either more ge∣nerally, or specially: Generally we may take it so farre foorth, as it discouers vnto vs either the whole world and all his parts, or at least some great and principall parts; such as is an Empire, Region, Kingdome, or such like. More specially and particularly, it hath vsually beene taken for the description of a very small place, whose situation in respect of the heauens is not noted, but of the parts one to the other: such as are Cities, Burrowes, Townes, Castles, Lakes, and Riuers. The former (whereat wee chiefly aime) cannot well bee performed without the vse of the Sphericall part: That latter we will more sparingly touch, being an infinite taske in the whole earth to descend to all particulars which come in our way: yet shall wee not altogether omit or neglect such circumstances in their due places, so farre foorth as wee can; leauing the rest to such Topographers, who spend their stocke in the description of some particular place or Region: whereof this our Age hath produced many deser∣uing high commendations. This Science was anciently ador∣ned by Homer, An imander, Milesius, Haecataeus, Democri∣tus, Eudoxius, Dicaearchus, Euphorus, as wee finde in Straboes first booke: to which afterward succeede, Eratosthenes, Polybius, Possidonius, and diuers others. Which part requires little or small knowledge in the Sciences Mathematicall, but challen∣geth more affinity with the Physicall and Politicall part of Phi∣losophie ; and therefore is more subiect to popular vnderstanding then the former, and may without it, affoord some profit to the Reader. 3 The Topicall part is either generall, or speciall: The generall is that which handles the gene∣rall Adiuncts of a place. 4 A place is a superficiall space of the Terrestriall Globe, fitted for habitation. To the constitution of a place (as it is here Topographically ta∣ken) there ought to be a concurrence of two things, which we may call Matter and Forme. The Matter is the space contained; or superficiall platforme of the earth whereon wee dwell. The forme is the capability or aptnesse of it for habitation; both which concurring together are conceiued to make a place, such as wee here Topographically vnderstand: for here wee vnderstand not a place Physically, for the receptacle of a na∣turall body; in which sense the Heauens and all the elements are said to haue their naturall places: Neither yet Geometri∣cally for a plaine whereon a line or figure may bee drawne: but Topographically for the vpper face of the earth whereon people or other liuing creatures may inhabite. This place as appeares by reason and holy Scriptures was more ancient then habitation. For whereas in the first Masse the earth was inueloped with waters on euery side, affording no place for dwelling; Almigh∣ty God is said afterwards to haue separated and parted the wa∣ters from the dry land, making the one a Receptacle for Fishes, and such creatures of the deepe, the other for a dwelling place for mankind, and such creatures as breath vpon the land: yet hath hee so prouided in his diuine wisdome, that neither the In∣habitants of the land can well want the Sea, nor the liuing crea∣tures in the Sea want the land. The one appeares in that wee are inforced to make vse of the sea, not onely for ood and nourishment, whereof a great part consisteth of fish: but al∣so for our Traffique and commerce with forraine Nations, which is better effected by Sea then Land-voyages. The latter is as easily shewed, in that the fishes of the Sea deriue not onely their composition, but also their proper nourishment from the land: whereof wee shall haue more occasion to speake here∣after. Now wee are moreouer to consider, that a place may bee taken in a double sense: first more largely for any place where∣in a creature may liue for longer or shorter time. Secondly, more strictly for such a space of earth, whereon mankinde may conueniently reside or dwell. The former comprehends not onely the land, but also the water; for experience shewes, that men in ships may for a time reside and dwell on the backe of the maine Ocean. But the latter betokening a continuance of habitation, is onely agreeable to the land: Which sense howbeit it be more consonant to the common vse of speech, yet for methode sake, wee are inforced to vse the former: vnder∣standing by habitation, not onely a place of conuenient resi∣dence, but any other whereon a creature for a time may breathe and liue. 1 The Terrestriall Spheare is euerywhere habi∣table. It was an ancient opinion (as we haue formerly touched) that the earth was not euerywhere habitable: namely, in the Intem∣perate Zones, whereof the one was placed in the middle of the earth, the other at the endes: the former was thought not habitable by reason of the extremity of heat; because the Sunne-beames there fall perpendicularly, and so make a greater reflection; The other for extremity of cold, by reason of the obliquity of the Sunne-beames, causing little or no reflection: whence a second cause seemes to be drawne from the extreame drought of those places, which seemes most opposite to mans temper, requiring a reasonable degree of moisture. But not∣withstanding these reasons of the ancients, it must needes bee confessed as an vndoubted truth, confirmed by experience of many N uigatours, that those Regions by them imagined vn∣fit for habitation, are not onely habitable, but in many places very populous. Neither want there many reasons found out by latter writers, to mitigate the rigour of this opinion: some whereof wee haue already touched in our former treatise. First, whereas they vrge the places vnder the Equinocti∣all to bee vnhabitable by reason of intemperate heat; wee may easily answer, that the dayes and nights are then alwayes equall, containing not aboue 12 houres, so that the space of ei∣ther being shorter, the cold of the night may well asswage the extreame heat of the day. Another reason is ordinarily taken from the extraordinarily high mountaines, commonly placed vnder the Equinoctiall, which approaching neerer the middle Region of the aire, must of necessity partake some what more of cold: which dayly experience can witnesse, in that their top are couered with snow euen in the depth of Summer. Thirdly, the neerenesse of the maine Ocean to a great part of this Region, is a great cause of this cold temper, because water is found to bee by nature cold. Fourthly, the set and certaine windes by nature ordained to blow in the hottest times of the yeere, may adde much to temperature. Fiftly, the extraordinary Raines and showers which those places suffer, which are vnder the Line, especially when the Sunne is verticall, are a great cause of the asswaging of the heat of the Sunne. Lastly, the custome of the Inhabitants being from their cradles inured to no other qua∣lity or disposition of the ayre, will take away much from our ad∣miration. On the other side no small reasons may bee shewed, why, the Regions lying neere or vnder the Pole should not bee so extreamely cold, but that they may admit of habitation. First, because the Sunne being for six moneths together aboue their Horizon, must needs impresse into the Ayre more heat then otherwise it would doe. Besides, the thicknesse incorporated (as it were) with heat, must needs receaue into it more degrees of it then a thinner and more refined ayre, because the intention of the quality most commonly supposeth the condensation or thickning of the subiect wherein it is. But no greater reason can bee shewed in this point then the cu∣stome of the Northerne inhabitants, exposed from their infan∣cy to no other temperament. If wee should aske a reason why wee vnmaske our faces against the encounter of the greatest cold, being a soft and tender part, not daring to vncouer our other parts, what reason can a man inuent but custome? If any should aske why barbarous people liuing in farre colder cli∣mates then this of ours, goe altogether naked, whereas the cold is mother of many diseases amongst vs who goe alwayes clothed; onely vse and custome can yeeld an answer. These reasons make it probable enough, that no place of the whole world is by nature made not habitable. Now that it is not on∣ly inhabitable by nature, but also for the most part truly in∣habited, will appeare as easily, if wee trust the testimony of Na∣uigatours which haue discouered few or no Regions wan∣ting some nhabitants. But that this proposition may bee more distinctly vnderstood, wee must know that the whole world is diuided into Sea and Land : for the Sea we may call it habita∣ble in that large sense before mentioned; to wit, that on it euery where men in ships may breath and liue; which is plaine out of experience of Nauigatours, who haue sailed round about the Earth from East to West, and haue entred farre towards the North and South: where at least some times of the yeere, or other they might finde the way passable: For the land which is here principally vnderstood, wee must note that it may bee considered two wayes; either for euery little quillet or parcell of land contaned in the superficies of the Earth; or else for a certaine Region of some indifferent greatnesse. In the former sense, it were too much to affirme euery part of the Earth to bee habitable; for as much as many places, as the toppes of the Alpes, or the sands of Africa, properly admit of no habitation; yet in an improper and large sense they may be called habitable, because on them a man may liue and breath for a certaine space of time. But if by the parts of the land wee vnderstand some reasonable greatnesse, no great doubt can bee made, but that it is either already inhabited by mankinde, or can at least admit of habitation, as that which not only for a time affords a man life and breath, but also some conuenient meanes of su∣stenance; for no countrey hath euer beene found so indigent and barren of all vitall aides, which is neither capeable of liuing creatures in the land, fit for mans nourishment; or that cannot draw Fishes from the Sea; or if this should faile, cannot afford Fruits or Herbage from the ground: or in case all the rest were deficient cannot haue passage by Water to other Countries, whence to relieue their necessities. And no question but nature hath stored euery Countrey with some commodity or other, which by trafficke may draw riches from other Regions, as by instances may more particularly appeare hereafter when wee shall speake of particular Regions, and their seuerall acci∣dents. 2 All places of the Earth haue suffered mani∣fold alteration and change as well in Name as Nature. I need not spend time to demonstrate this Assertion, for that euery place of the Earth hath beene subiect to much mutation in the processe of time, as well in Nature of the Soyle as of the Inhabitants, a few obuious instances in each Countrey will easi∣ly certifie: yet will it not seeme amisse, I hope, to shew the progresse, manner, and causes of this alteration, which would giue no small satisfaction. To discourse of all changes accor∣ding to all times were a matter infinite: Wee may referre all to two heads, to wit, the change of Names, and the change of Na∣ture. Concerning the former that most Countreyes haue chan∣ged their first and originall names, is most euident to such as consult the Maps and writings of our common Geographers: for few or none will discouer vnto vs any Region by that name, by which it was knowne in former times: in so much, as great controuersie and dispute hath growne about diuerse coun∣treyes mentioned by ancient writers, whereof the name should take its first originall; but of this change we shall speake hereaf∣ter. But if we consider the naturall changes of Countries, sithence the first creation wee shall finde them to haue suffered as well in the naturall accidents, and disposition of the soile, as the tem∣per of the Inhabitants ; concerning the former wee may note a twofold alteration: whereof the one is a progresse from Imper∣fection to Perfection ; the other contrariwise, from Perfection to Imperfection. The first groweth out of the generall Industrie of mankinde, which is wont to worke euery thing as neere as it can to his best ends and vse, for his owne good and pro∣pagation of his kinde: which wee may best finde in the first ori∣ginall of the world, the first ground-worke of ciuill society; for man being once expelled out of Paradise for his owne trans∣gression, had left him notwithstanding for his lot the whole world besides, which no question hee found as in the cradle of Nature a poore infant, as yet altogether vnfashioned and vn∣shaped for humane habitation. For who can imagine the earth at that time to bee any otherwise then as a vast Wildernesse all ouergrowne with briers and bushes growing of their owne ac∣cord out of the Earth: Moreouer what Fennes, Bogges, Ma∣rishes, and other such incombrances could there bee wanting to those places which neuer yet felt the chastising hand of hus∣bandrie? All these incommodities, as mankind began to multi∣plie and propagate it selfe on the face of the Earth, were by little and little remoued, and the Earth reduced into a better forme for humane dwelling: because euery man choosing out his owne possession, began presently to till and manure the soyle with all heedfull industrie. For if our first Parents being placed in Para∣dise it selfe, the most pleasant and fertile portion of the whole world, were neuerthelesse enioyned to dresse and manure the Garden for their better vse and profit; what shall wee imagine of the other parts of the Earth, which (no doubt) a thousand de∣grees come short of this perfection: especially knowing this curse to bee laid on man by our Creatour: That he should eat his bread in the sweat of his browes ; as though the earth were bound to open her treasures onely to mans paines and labour. And howsoeuer the diligence of mankinde hath gone very farre in adorning and fashioning the vpper face of the earth, yet hath it not waded so farre, but that many places in our times are left altogether rude and vncultered, groaning vnder vast Wilder∣nesses and vnprofitable desarts. For times past wee might haue for instance, gone no farther then Britanie and Germanie ; both which Countryes we shall finde in these dayes to differ as much from the dayes of Caesar, as Caesar iudged them to differ from the Roman Territory; which no doubt hee preferred before all parts of Europe. Notwithstanding this generall inclination of mankinde to perfect their dwelling places for their better ease and comfort, wee shall finde many wayes whereby the parts of the Earth haue degenerated, and proued more vnfit for humane habitation then in former times. The first which is the grea∣test, and cause of all the rest, is that Curse which our Almighty Creatour cast on the whole earth for Adams sake, which af∣terward seemes renued and increased in the generall deluge, wherein all mankinde suffered for their sinnes a plague of wa∣ters. For as the estate of mankind immediatly before the Flood was farre better then that afterwards, so was the estate of Para∣dice farre better then that: So as wee may note from the be∣ginning of the world a generall defect and weakenesse of the Creatures, still more and more declining from their originall perfection granted in the first creation. So that many great Phi∣losophers haue coniectured, not without ground, that the world from the first creation hath suffered the change of ages sen∣sibly, and this wherein wee liue to bee the last and decre∣pite age, wherein Nature lyeth languishing, as ready to breath out her last. But this opinion seemes to bee controled by reason; for as much as wee finde not a proportionall decrement and de∣fect of naturall vigour in things, as well in man as other crea∣tures. For if wee compare the estate of a man before the Flood, with the age of Dauid long after, wee shall finde a great dispa∣rity in the proportionall decrement of the Yeeres and Ages of men: for as much as many before the Flood attained to 800, and some as Methusalem, to 900 yeeres: But in Dauid time, the dayes of mans life (as he himselfe testifieth) are threescore and ten: and admit wee vnderstand this speech of Dauid to bee meant only of his chiefest strength and liuelyhood, wee shall yet finde a great diuersity, because man is vnderstood to bee in his greatest strength and vigour in his middle age; so that the whole age of man by this account surmounts not 140 yeeres. To which proportion of defect or decrement our times can no way agree, because many men in our dayes come neere the same age, as wee see by experience, which may bee confirmed by diuerse instan∣ces, whereof wee will produce only two: the one of a certaine Indian presented to Soliman the Turke, being of the age of 200 yeeres: the other of the Countresse of Desmond in Ireland (which S r Walter Rauleigh mentions to this purpose) who was married in Edward the fourth's time, yet was aliue very lately. But to this doubt I might answer, that this extraordinary diffe∣rence betwixt the ages of men, betweene the Patriarches and Dauids time compared with men, ages betwixt Dauids and our dayes, came from two especiall causes: First by the vniuer∣sall Deluge, which caused a generall defect and decay of nature in the whole earth, the like whereof hath not since beene found: Secondly, it was (as it seemes) much impaired by the Intempe∣rance and luxurious diet of those times, which added much to this generall weaknesse of nature: for as much as the children can haue little or no naturall perfection in themselues more then is deriued vnto them by their parents. For nothing can giue that to others which it neuer had it selfe; whence it must needs come to passe, that the posterity deriued from luxurious and di∣stempered bodyes, should proue as weake and impotent gene∣rally (if not more) then their Parents. Now why the people soone vpon the Flood should finde their distemperature more noxious and preiudiciall to long life then the men of our age, a good reason may bee giuen; because the Earth long after the Flood had not fully receaued that naturall heat and spirit which it lost in the Deluge. So that all things arising out of it, as Plants, Hearbs, Fruits, and liuing creatures feeding thereon, proued for a while more vnwholsome and vnnaturall, then in some yeeres after, when it had somewhat reuiued it selfe by the heat of the Sunne and the Starre, and by little and little returned to his owne nature. The other cause of deficiencie is more spe∣ciall, as not happening to all, but to diuerse parts of the Earth, and that more at one time then another: as the neglect of due manuring many places, caused commonly two wayes; either by contagion naturally incident to diuerse places, or by hostile In∣uasion and deuastation: of this latter arise two maine effects; The first is the want and scarcity of Inhabitants, which should dresse and manure the ground to make it more fruitfull and ac∣commodate to mans vse. The second is their pouerty and cap∣tiuity ; whereof the one makes them vnable, the second vnwil∣ling to effect any great matter for the benefit of the Land. A good instance whereof wee may finde in the land of Palestine : which in times past by God himselfe was called, A land flow∣ing with milke and hony, for the admirable pleasantnesse and fer∣tility of the Soile: yet at this day, if wee will credit trauellers report, a most barren Region, deuoid almost of all good com∣modity fit for the vse of man, in the ruines of which, some∣times famous kingdome, euery bleere-eyed iudgement may ea∣sily read Gods curse long since denounced; Which strange al∣teration next vnto Gods anger wee can ascribe to no other cause then the hostile inuasion of forraine enemies, which hath almost l ft the land waste without the natiue Inhabitants; whence it could not chuse in a short time but degenerate from the ancient fruitfulnesse. The like may we finde in all those miserable Re∣gions which groane at this day vnder the tyranny of the vsur∣ping Turke: whence a prouerbe runnes currant amongst them: That where the Turkes horse hath once grazed, no grasse will euer aft r grow: which signifies no other then the barbarous manner of the Turkes, hauing once conquered a land, to lay it open euer after to deuastation: for being for the most part warlike men trained vp in martiall discipline, they little or nothing at all re∣gard the vse of husbandry: whence in short time a Countrey must needs urne wild and vnfruitfull. To these causes we may adde the influence of heauenly constellations, which being va∣ried according to the times, produce no small effects in the changes and alterations of the earth. The diuerse alteration in the disposition of the Inhabitants which was our second point, we haue refer ed to another place neere the end of this tract, to which is properly appertaines. 3 Pl ces hauing long continued without habitati∣on are seldome so healthy and fit for dwelling as those which haue beene inhabited. This Proposition I haue knowne to bee warranted by the Te∣stimonie of many experienced Nauigators: in so much as I pre∣sume few men can doubt of the truth of it, who hath either beene a Traualler himselfe into farre Countreyes, or at least hath read other mens discoueries. The onely matter therefore wee here intend, is to produce certaine causes of this effect, to giue satisfaction to such as make a distinction betwixt the know∣ledge of the effect, and inquiry of the cause. The first cause which I can alleage is the industrie of mankinde inhabiting any Countrey (mentioned in the former Theoreme) out of which ariseth a twofold effect. 1 The improuing of the Soyle, by re∣mouing all such impediments as otherwise would proue noy∣some to mankinde, for whereas all things growing of their owne accord, are suffered to rot into the ground; in like man∣ner what other can wee expect but Fennes, Fogges, and noi∣some vapours, altogether hurtfull to the welfare and life of man. 2 The profit of mans industrie is no lesse apparent in ma∣nuring the ground, and opening the vpper face of the Earth: which being composed of diuerse substances, sendeth forth ma∣ny times certaine hot fumes and vapours, which in many cold Countreyes mollify the vsuall rigour of the Aire, which most offends the Inhabitants. This reason is giuen by my Countrey∣man Captaine Whitborne for the extreame cold, which some men professe themselues to haue tried in New-found-land, which neuerthelesse, according to many mens description, is knowne to lye farre more South then England : for the natiues of the Countrey being for the most part driuen into the North part by the Europeans, who vsually trade there for fish, and they themselues liuing altogether on Fish from the Sea, or some wild beasts on the land, as Beares, Deare, and such like; with∣out any manuring of the ground for herbage; The Soyle by them is in a manner left altogether vnmanured: so that neither the soyle can bee well cleansed from noisome vapours arising from the putrefaction of herbage rotting (as I said) into the ground, or left free to send out such wholsome fumes and vapours from its interiour parts, which may warme the Ayre, and preserue mankind. 3 A third reason drawne from mens In∣dustries, that those Countreyes which haue inioyed Inhabitants by the continuall vse of Fires, haue their Aire more purged and refined from drossie and noisome vapours, which vsually arise out of a contagious soyle, daily infected by putrefaction: for scarce any nation hath beene knowne so barbarous and ignorant which hath not the inuention and vse of Fire: neither is any in∣fection of the aire so pestilent, and opposite to humane consti∣tution, which the breath of fire will not in some sort dispell. If any man obiect the distance of houses and villages wherein fire is vsed, which seeme to claime a small interest in the change of the ayre hanging ouer a whole Countrey: let him well consider the quicknesse of motion and fluidity of the Ayre, passing (as it were) in a moment from one place to the other, and hee may soone answer his owne obiection. All those reasons hitherto mentioned an inhabited Region owes to mans industrie, which wee generally touched in the precedent Theoreme. The second cause which is as a consequent of habitation, is the necessity of breathing of people liuing in any Region of the earth, where∣by may follow two effects. 1 A certaine measure of heat im∣pressed into the aire, as wee see in any roome in a great throng of people, by reason of their breathing together in one place. 2 The assimilation of the Aire to humane bodies, by a conti∣nuall respiration. These alterations of the aire, might perhaps to common apprehensions, seeme small and insensible. But hee that considers how great a quantity of aire is requisite for a mans respiration, and the space and extent of motion together with the multitude of Inhabitants in a populous Countrey, would hold it no strange matter, that the breathing of men should breed such an alteration of the aire: wee finde by experience, that strong built houses being left tenantlesse, will soone fall into decay, not so much for want of reparation, as the foggy vapours and moisture, caused by want of Respiration. The like whereof in some proportion may we imagine to be in a region wanting Inhabitants, and depriued of this benefit of nature. CHAP. II. Of the Generall Adiuncts of Places. 1 I N a place Topographically taken two things are to bee considered. 1. The Adiuncts. 2 The Descrip∣tion : The Adiuncts are such pro∣prieties as agree to speciall places. 2 Such Adiuncts agree to a place, either in res∣pect of the Earth it selfe, or in respect of the Heauens : Those which agree to a place in respect of the Earth, are either Internall or Externall. 3 The Internall I call such as are inbred in the Earth it selfe: which are of two sorts; either Common, or Magneticall. 4 The Common are in number three. 1 The Magnitude, or extent of a Countrey. 2 The Bounds. 3 The Quality. The Magnitude com∣prehends the Length and Breadth of any Region. Some man might imagine that I make a needlesse repetition of these proprieties: for as much as many of them seeme to haue beene spoken of before in our Sphericall part. But I answer that I there handled no other matters, but such as concerned the whole globous body of the Earth; but my intent here is to treat of such proprieties, as particularly designe out a speciall place. For it is not one thing to speake of the Magnitude of the whole Earth, according to all its dimensions; and to treat of the man∣ner of measuring some particular Region, marked out in the Spheare. Wee haue defined the Magnitude of a Region to bee either of Length or Breadth: because (as wee haue taught in our former chapter) it is a space contained in the surface of the Earth. Then can it not according to Geometricall grounds, ex∣ceed two Dimensions: These two Dimensions (as wee haue said) are length and breadth, whereof euery plaine figure, or su∣perficies consists. 5 The Magnitude of a Region may bee mea∣sured two wayes: either by the Diameter, or the Circumf rence. The Diameter is consi∣dered either in Latitude or Longitude: of the Latitude, whence ariseth the Breadth of a Countrey from North or South, note these Rules. 1 If the place whose breadth is sought, bee di∣stant from the Equatour, and bee wholy situate in the same Hemispheare, the lesser Latitude subtracted from the greater will giue the Dia∣meter. To put this Rule in practise, it behooues the Topographer, who would finde out the greatnesse of any Region, to obserue two Latitudes: to wit, to measure the Latitude in the most Nor∣therne point, where it is greatest: as also in the Southerne point, where it is least of all. This latter subducted from the former, will giue the Diameter or breadth from North to South: which may easily, according to the Rules in the former booke, bee re∣duced into Miles, or other such measures. For an example wee need goe no farther then our Iland of Great Brittaine: The Southmost part of which lying about Star-point in Deuon, hath in Latitude about 50 degrees: The Northermost point situate neere the mouth of the riuer Ardurnus in the farthermost part of Scotland, hath in Latitude about 60 degrees (to omit minutes) The lesser of these Latitudes subtracted from the greater▪ the residue will bee 10 degrees, which being imagined in the Me∣ridian which is a greater circle, are to be multiplied by 60, and so conuerted into miles, which will be 600, the length of Brit∣tany from South to North. 2 If the place whose Magnitude wee enquire, bee vnder the Equatour, the Southerne Latitude added to the Northerne will shew the breadth from the North to the South. To illustrate this by an example, wee will take the whole con∣tinent of Africa, whose Southerne Latitude about the Cape of Good hope, wee all finde to bee neere thirty Degrees, the most Northerne Latitude about the straights of Gibralter, very neere the same rate: These two summes added together will amount to 60 Degrees, which multiplied by 60, the number of miles answerable to a degree in a great circle (because wee suppose it here to bee an Arch of the Meridian) we shall haue 3600 miles, the breadth of Africa from South to North. 4 The measure of the length of a Region be∣twixt East and West, admits of two cases: for either the Countrey is supposed to be without the first Meridian, or vnder it: both which shall be taught in these Rules. 1 If the Region be situate without the first Meridi∣an, the lesser Longitude subtracted from the greater, will shew the Diameter betwixt East and West. For an example of which wee will take Cape de Barca, lying ouer against S. Thomas Iland in Africa, vnder the Equatour, whose Longitude is about 30 Degrees, and Melnide situate neere the Equatour ouer against Sinus Barbaricus, on the other side of A∣frica, which hath in Longitude 63 Degrees. The least Longi∣tude, to wit 30, being subducted from 63, there will remaine 33 Degrees; which being taken in a greater circle, which is the Equatour, or a Parallell very neere (which admits no sensible difference) we multiply by 60, and there will arise 1980 Itali∣an -miles, but if the Degrees be taken in one of the lesser Paral∣lells, we must proceed according to the Table of miles answer∣able to Degrees of Latitude in the former booke. 7 Another Case is when the place is situate vn∣der the first Meridian : The length and mea∣sure of such a Region is found out by this Rule. 1 Let the Westerne Longitude bee subtracted out of the whole circle, and to the Residue added the Easterne Longitude, the summe will giue the greatnesse and distance betwixt East and West. For an instance wee will take Groenland, supposed in most of our Globes and Mappes, to bee an Iland which is set downe di∣rectly vnder the first Meridian, passing by the Azores in Kaeri∣us his Globe: It hath assigned it for Westerne Longitude about 340 Degrees: for Easterne Longitude about 30 degrees. Then according to our Rule 340 bee subtracted from 360, the whole circle there will remaine 20, which being added to 30 the Ea∣sterne Longitude there will arise 50: which being multiplied by 25, the number of miles answerable to the Latitude of the place, being about 65, there will bee produced 1250 Italian -miles, the distance or length betwixt the East and the West part of Groenland: 8 Hitherto of the measuring of Countreyes by the Diameter, the other way is performed by the circuit: which manner of measuring wee will briefly censure in these two Pro∣positions. 1 The measuring of any Countrey by the Circuit of it, is very deceitfull and full of errours. It hath beene a common custome amongst Nauigatours to iudge of the greatnesse of any Countrey, by sayling round about it: which kind of measuring is not alwayes to be reiected: for as much as in new discoueries sometimes no other way can bee had. Neuerthelesse this manner of measuring must needs proue very vncertaine for diuers reasons. First in regard of the motion of the ship, which by reason of diuerse and contra∣ry winds, which must needs happen very frequently, cannot al∣wayes moue with the same swiftnesse. Secondly because the Sea it selfe (as wee shall hereafter shew) hath in diuerse places diuerse speciall motions and currents, as from the East to West; whence it must needs inforce an inequality of motion in the ship. The third reason, which is greater then all the rest, is drawne from the various Figuration of Countreyes, whose greatnesse cannot bee knowne by the circumference. Because (as Geometricians teach vs) two figures may haue one and the selfe-same circuit about them, and yet the one shall extraordi∣narily exceed the other in greatnesse: as for example, let there be imagined two Parallelogrammes ; the one an exact square of six foot; the other a long square of 10 foot in Length, and two in Breadth. The one comprehends 36 square feet, the other 20, as will appeare by multiplication of their sides, the one into the other▪ in which numbers there is a great inequality. Yet not∣withstanding if we measure the circuit or circumference of each Figure, we shall finde them equall, to wit, of 24 foot, as will ap∣peare by their figures here prefixed. For amongst those Figures called Isoperimetrall, or of equall Perimeter, that is alwayes to bee esteemed the greatest, which is the more Ordinate figure: which is that, which commeth neerest to an equality of Sides and Angles. But in Inordinate Figures (of which nature for the most part are all Regions) infinite errour may be committed, if we measure them by circumnauigation: wherefore to measure a Countrey more exactly it behooueth vs not only to know the Circumference, but also the Diameter. 2 Those Countreyes are more exactly measured which partake of a plaine surface. The reason of this Proposition is easily shewed, because a plaine Superficies consists of right lines. But a right line (as Euclide witnesseth) is the shortest betwixt his owne bounds: whereas betweene two points infinite crooked lines may bee drawne: whence it must needs follow, that more certainty and exact∣nesse is to bee expected in the measure of a Plaine Countrey whose Diameter is a Right line, then from a Crooked and hilly trey, Region, where the Corde is crooked and gibbous. Whence some Mathematicians haue demonstrated, that more men may stand on a Sphericall Superficies, as a Hill or moun∣taine, then on a Plaine, although both are found to be of the same Diameter ▪ It may bee here objected, that the earth is euery where crooked and orbicular, and therefore no part thereof can bee measured by a Right line : I answer that the Earth is indeed Sphericall (as wee haue formerly proued) yet may some little part or portion thereof bee counted as a Plaine ; because such parts haue little or no proportion to the whole masse of the Earth. This conuexity therefore being so little, may passe for a plaine without any sensible errour. Hence wee may gather that the Land cannot so exactly bee measured as the Sea. For as much as the land for the most part is vneuen, varied with hills, Dale , and other inequalities. But the Sea euery where plaine and like it selfe, except the rising of the waues and surges, which in so great a distance will make no difference at all. Secondly, we may hence collect that of two Countreyes of the same bounds and figure, that must bee the greatest whose soyle and su∣perficies is most varyed and crooked: because (as wee haue said) crooked lines betwixt the same points are longer then right, and therefore measure the greater Magnitude. 9 Thus much of the Magnitude. The Bound of a Countrey is a line compassing it round. This definition is very euident, in that euery Region is To∣pographically considered as a Plaine or Superficies, whose bound is a line compassing it round: for as a Line is bounded by a Point, so a Superficies by a Line, as wee are taught in Geometry. Now wee must consider that the bounds of Countreyes may bee taken two manner of wayes: First Geometrically, for the meere line, which is imagined to goe round about it: Seconly, Geo∣graphically, for the visible markes and Characters▪ whereby the line is traced out vnto vs, such as are Riuers, Cities, Hills, Castles, and such like. These markes whereby a Topographer noteth out vnto vs the bounds and limits of Countreyes, are of two sorts; either Naturall or Artificiall. The naturall are such as are deriued from nature without mans appointment, such as are Riuers, Creekes, Mountaines, Woods, and such like other matters, which bound the extents of Countreyes. The Artificiall bounds are such as depend vpon some constitution or decree of a man, which so diuide one Countrey from another: the parti∣tion being often made where no notable marke or bound is set by nature. 1 Naturall bounds are more certaine then Artifi∣ciall. The reason is because naturall signes or markes which are set for bounds of Countreyes are alwayes the same, and (as it were) continued from the first creation: and cannot bee changed with∣out some great Earthquake, Inundat on, or such like alteration in nature, which very seldome happeneth, and in very few pla∣ces: whereas on the contrary part, such bounds and limits, as depend vpon mans appointment, may bee altered and changed according to the wills and dispositions of men: as wee daily see amongst vs, that ancient lands and inheritances are much que∣stioned concerning their bounds and limits: as also great con∣trouersie is made amongst Geographers concerning the boun∣ding of Countreyes and Territories, anciently knowne and de∣fined by old writers: For names and particular contracts be∣twixt men in a few ages, may easily slip out of memory; espe∣cially when the possessours themselues (as it often happens) striue to extinguish and raze out the memory of former ages, leauing behind them no marke or signe to tell the world their wronged neighbours right, or the limited fortunes of their owne possessions. 2 Equall bounds doe not alwayes containe equall Regions. This Proposition is plainely demonstrated before in this very Chapter: wherein wee haue proued of two figures suppo∣sed equall in the circumference, that to bee the greatest, which more neerely approacheth an Ordinate figure: which wee de∣fine to bee that which commeth neerest to an equality of Sides and Angles. So that two Regions, the one round, the other square, may haue an equall compasse about, and yet the for∣mer will bee a great deale greater, in respect of the space there∣in contained. 10 In the next place we are to consider the Qua∣lity. By the quality I vnderstand the natu∣rall temper and disposition of a certaine place. 1 Speciall places are endowed with speciall tem∣pers and dispositions. That Almighty God, who created the whole world, hath not, granted the same gifts and indowments to all Countreyes, but hath diuided diuerse commodities to diuerse Regions, seemeth a matter out of all controuersie. For who findes not by experi∣ence one Countrey hot, another cold, a third temperate: one fruitfull, another barren, a third indifferent : one healthie, ano∣ther vnwholsome. The like diuersity is also found in the inhabi∣tants themselues, according to that common prouerbe: Va∣lentes Thebani, Acutiores Attici: whence this diuersity should arise, it is a hard matter to vnfold; for as much as many causes herein concurre, sometimes to helpe, sometimes to crosse one the other: yet will I striue as neere as I can to reduce them to certaine Heads, by which a generall guesse may bee giuen to the particulars. The first reason may bee drawne from the situa∣tion of the Earth, in respect of the heauen and Starres therein fixed. This may cause a diuersity of disposition two wayes; 1 By reason of the Sun, and his generall light and influxe: whence in the Earth are ingendred the foure first qualities of Heate, Cold, Drouth, and Moisture, whereon depends a great part of the disposition, not only of the soyle, but also of mans body: for as much as the one ordinarily borrowes his fruitfulnesse or barrennesse of these first qualities: and the other hath his vitall Organes (which are the ministers of the Soule) much affected with them; in so much as some Philosophers haue vndertaken to define all the differences of mens wits and intellectuall fa∣culties out of the Temperament of the braine, according to these foure accidents. And what Physitian will not acknow∣ledge, all these Qualities and their mixture to challenge an ex∣traordinary preheminence in the disposition and constitution of mans body, whose mixture is the first ground of health or sicknesse. The second meanes whereby the Heauens may cause a diuersity of temper in diuerse places, is from the speciall In∣fluences of some particular Starres and constellations incident to particular places: for it were blockish to imagine that so ma∣ny various Starres of diuerse colours and magnitudes should bee set in the Firmament to no other vse then to giue light to the world, and distinguish the times: sith the ordinary Physitian can easily discouer the Moones influence by the increase of hu∣mours in mans body: and the experience of Astrologers will warrant much more by their obseruation: as assigning to each particular aspect of the Heauens a particular and speciall influ∣ence and operation. Now it is euident that all aspects of the Heauens cannot point out and designe all places alike; for as much as the beames wherein it is conueyed, are somewhere perpendicularly, other where obliquely darted, and that more or lesse according to the place: whence it commeth to passe that neither all places can enioy the same Temperament, nor the same measure and proportion. Yet wee say not that the hea∣uenly bodyes haue any power to impose a Necessitie vpon the wills and dispositions of men; but onely an inclination: For the Starres worke not Immediatly on the intellectuall part or minde of man, but Mediatly, so farre forth as it depends on the Temperament and materiall organes of the body. But of this wee shall especially speake hereafter. Where (God willing) shall bee opened the manner of this celestiall operation. By this wee may vnderstand how farre the Heauens haue power to cause a diuersity in Places and Nations. The second rea∣son may bee the Imbred Quality, Figure, and Site of the Places themselues; For that there is another cause of diuersity besides the situation of places in respect of the Heauens, may easily bee proued out of experience; for wee finde that places situate vn∣der the same Latitude, partake, of a diuerse and opposite Tem∣per and disposition, as the middle of Spayne about Toledo, which is very hot and the Southermost bound of Virginia, which is found to bee Temperate betwixt both: All which notwithstan∣ding are vnder the selfe-same Latitude, or very neere, without any sensible degree of difference: also we sometimes finde pla∣ces more Southward toward the Equatour to partake more of cold, then such as are more Notherne, as the Toppes of the Alps being perpetually couered with Snow, are without que∣stion colder then England, although they lye neerer to the equi∣noctiall. Likewise Aluares reporteth that hee saw Ice vpon the water in the Abyssines Countrey in the month of Iuly, which notwithstanding is neere or vnder the Line. And Martin Frobi∣sher relates, that he found the ayre about Friezland more cold & stormy about 61 degrees then in other places neere 70 degrees. Wherefore we must needs ascribe some effect and operation to the soyle it selfe: first in respect of the Superficies which is di∣uersly varied with Woods, Riuers, Marishes, Rockes, Moun∣taines, Valleyes, Plaines: whence a double variety ariseth: first of the foure first Qualities, which is caused by the Sunne-beames being diuersly proiected according to the conformity of the place: Secondly, of Meteors and Exhalations drawne vp from the Earth into the Aire: both which concurring must needs cause a great variety in mans disposition: according to that prouerbe, Athenis ten e coelum, Thebis crassum: or that bitter taunt of the Poet on Boeotians, Boeotum in crasso iurares aëre na∣tum. For ordinary experience will often shew that a thinne and sharp ayre vsually produceth the best witts; as contrariwise grosse and thicke vapours drawne from muddie and marish grounds thicken and stupifie the spirits, and produce men com∣monly of blockish and hoggish dispositions and natures, vnapt for learning, and vnfit for ciuill conuersation. Secondly, there must needs be granted to speciall Countreyes, certaine Specifi∣call qualities, which produce a certaine Sympathie, or Antipa∣thie in respect of some things or others: whence it commeth to passe that some plants and hearbs, which of their owne accord spring out of the Earth in some Countreyes, are found to pine & wither in others: some Beasts and Serpents are in some places seldome knowne to breed or liue, wherewith notwithstanding other Regions swarme in abundance: as for example, Ireland, wherein no Serpent or venomous worme hath beene knowne to liue, whereby Africa and many other Countreyes finde no small molestation. Neither is this variety onely shewne in the diuersity of the kindes, but also in the variation of things in the same kinde, whereof we might produce infinite examples. For who knowes not, which is a Physition, that many simples apt for medicine growing in our land, come farre short in vertue of those which are gathered in other countreyes. I need amongst many ordinary instances giue no other then in our Rubarb and Tobacco: whereof the former growing in our Countrey, except in case of extremity, is of no vse with our Physitians: the other as much scorned of our ordinary Tobacconists: yet both general∣ly deriued from the true mother the Indies, in great vse and request. But of this last Instances are most common, and yet for their ignorance of the true cause, most admirable. The causes of the former might in some sort bee found out either in the Heauens, or in the Elementary n ture of the Earth. But some speciall proprieties haue discouered themselues, which cannot be imagined to owe their cause to either, but to some third o∣riginall, which the Physicians in their Simples more properly tearme virtus specifica. If any man should demand why coun∣treyes farther from the course of the Sunne should be found hot∣ter, then some which are neerer? Why the Rhenish wine Grape transported from Germany into Spaine, should yeeld vs the Sherry Sacke ? Euery ordinary Phylosopher, which hath trauel∣led little beyond Aristotles Materia Prima, will bee ready to hammer out a cause, as ascribing the former to the Heigth or Depression of the soyle: the latter to the excesse of heat in Spaine aboue that of Germany. But should wee farther demand, 1 why Ireland with some other Regions indure no venemous thing. 2 Why Wheat in S. Thomas Iland, should shut vp all into the Blade, and neuer beare graine? 3 Why in the same Iland no fruit which hath any stone in it, will euer prosper? 4 Why our Mastiffes (a seruiceable kinde of creature against the molesta∣tion of Wolues, and such hurtfull beasts) transported into France, should after a litter or two degenerate into Curres, and proue altogether vnseruiceable? 5 Why with vs in England, some places produce Sheep of great stature but course wooll; other places small Sheep, but of very fine wooll: which being naturally transplanted, will in a generation or two so degene∣rate the one into the others nature, that the greater sheep loose somewhat of their greatnesse, yet improue their fleeces; as the other increase their stature, but loose much in the finenesse of their wooll? 6 Why many places at the ridge of the moun∣taines Andi in America cannot bee passed ouer without ex∣treame vomitting and griping euen vnto death. 7 Why a Ri∣uer in the Indies should haue such a nature to breed a great long worme in a mans leg, which oftentimes proues mortall vnto the patient, with infinite the like examples found in Geo∣graphers, concerning the nature and accidents of Fountaines, Hearbs, Trees, Beasts, and Men themselues (as wee shall shew hereafter) so much varied according to the disposition of the soyle, what wiser answer can an ingenious man expect then si∣lence or admiration? for to make recourse to Sympathies, An∣tipathies, and such hidden qualities with the current of our Phi∣losophers, is no other then in such sort to confesse our owne ig∣norance, as if notwithstanding, wee desired to bee accounted learned: for beside the difference of the termes wherein euery Mountebanke may talke downe a iudicious Scholler; I see no aduantage betwixt a Clowne which sayes he is ignorant of the cause of such an effect, or of a iuggling Scholler which assignes the cause to bee a sympathie, antipathie, or some occult quality. I speake not this to countenance supine blockishnesse, or to cast a blocke in the way of curious industrie. The former disposition I haue alwayes hated, and the latter still wished in my selfe, and admitted in others. All which I can in this matter propose to a curious wit to bee sought, must bee reduced to one of these two heads: for either such admirable effects as we haue mentioned, must arise from some Formall and Specificall vertue in the soyle, or from some extraordinary Temperament made of a rare com∣bination of the Elements, and their secondary mixtures, as of Hearbs, Stones, Mineralls, and vapours arising from such, and affecting the Aire: of both which wee shall haue some occasion to treat in the particular Adiuncts of places; yet so, as I feare I shall neither giue my selfe content, or my Reader any sufficient satisfaction. But In magnis voluisse sat est. 11 Hitherto of the common imbred Adiuncts of the Earth Topographically taken: Next we will speake somewhat of the Magneticall Affe∣ctions of a place: These are in number two, viz: Variation and Declination. We haue in our former Treatise of the Magneticall nature of the Earth handled diuerse other affections, growing from the Magneticall Temper and disposition of the terrestriall Globe: whence some man might here collect this repetition to bee alto∣gether needlesse, or at the least imperfect, omitting many other of the Magneticall Affections. To this I answer, that it is one thing to speake of these Affections as they agree to the whole Spheare of the Earth: Another thing to consider them, as they are particular proprieties, and markes of particular places and Regions. In the former sort haue we) besides the Variation and Declination) handled many other affections of the Earth magne∣tically considered. Wee here onely speake of these two, as they are speciall markes and proprieties of sqeciall places: which it behooues a Topographer to obserue as a matter worthy of obser∣uation in the description of any place. The vse shall be commen∣ded vnto vs in these two Theoremes. 1. The Magneticall Variation is of no vse for the first finding out of the Longitude; yet may it serue to good purpose for the Recognition of a place here∣tofore discouered. The reason of this wee haue shewne in our former booke; be∣cause the variation seldome or neuer answeres proportionally to the Longitude, as some of the ancients on false grounds haue surmised: whence no true consequence can bee drawne from the variation of a place to the finding out of the Longitude; yet may it bee of speciall vse for the new finding out of such pla∣ces as haue formerly by others beene first discouered, so the va∣riation were first by them diligently and faithfully noted and obserued: first because few places in the Earth can exactly and precisely agree in the selfe-same variation; but in some Degree or minute will bee found to varie. Secondly, if any two places should bee found to accord in the same Degree of Variation ; yet comparing the variation with the degree of Declination, wee shall commonly finde a difference: for as much as places agree∣ing in variation, may notwithstanding varie in the Declination. Thirdly, if two places should be equalized in both (as wee can∣not deny it to bee possible) yet the comparing of these two Ma∣gneticall motions with other affections, as well in respect of the Earth it selfe as of the Heauens, will giue at least a probable di∣stinction: of which cases it is not hard out of the obseruations of our new writers and Nauigatours to giue particular instances. Concerning the first, we finde the variation of the compasse at Cape Verde, to bee iust 7 Degrees; about the Ilands neere to Cape Verde to amount only to 4 Degrees; whence a Sea-man (if other helpes failed) may hereafter, as he passeth, distinguish the one from the other, and if occasion serue, correct this er∣rour. In the like sort might a man (otherwise altogether igno∣rant of the place) out of former obseruations, in the same Iland of Cuba distinguish betwixt Cape Corientes and Cape S. Anthony ; In that the one hath only 3 degrees of variatiō, wheras the other hath 13: for an instance of the second case we will take the coasts of Brasill 100 leagues distant from the shoare, & Cape Corientes beyond Cape bonae spei, which agree in the same variation: to wit, amounting to 7 Degrees 30 minutes: which notwithstan∣ding are distinguisht by their seuerall declination: for howsoe∣uer the magneticall motion of variation being of late inuented, hath not so particularly beene traced out in all or most places, yet must the declination of each place needs be different; for as much as the former hath 23 degrees of South Latitude, the other none at all lying iust vnder the Equinoctiall: since the Latitude (as wee haue formerly taught) is in some measure proportionall to the Declination. For the third, if any two places bee found agreeing both in Variation and Declination, as may bee probably guessed of Cape Rosse in S. Iohns Iland, and the west end of S. Iohn de Porto Rico: the Latitude being all one as of 17 degrees 44 minutes: and the variation admitting perhaps insensible difference, to wit, of a little more then one degree: yet might this helpe conioyned with former Trauellers report, or some small obseruation of heauenly bodies, or sounding the bottome of the Sea, settle our opinion and make a plaine distinction. 2 The Declination of any place being knowne the Latitude may also bee found out, although not without some errour. The ground of this Assertion we haue formerly handled in the Treatise of the Magneticall Affections of the Earth; where wee haue shewed that the Declination of the Magneticall needle is alwayes answerable in some proportion to the Latitude of the place: whence it must needs follow, that the declination any where being found out together with the proportion, the Lati∣titude must needs be knowne. In this point I referre my Rea∣der to D. Ridleye's late Treatise of Magneticall bodies and Mo∣tions, wherein hee by the helpe of M. Briges, hath calculated a certaine briefe table for this purpose. But that this manner of Inuention of the Latitude of a place, must needs admit of some errour, cannot well be denied; for as much as Gilbert, Ridley, and others, which haue written of this subiect; haue acknow∣ledged this motion of Declination to bee in many places irregu∣lar, and not answerable in due proportion to the Degrees of La∣titude, which diuerse friends of mine, well experienced in mag∣neticall experiments, haue to their great wonder confessed. 12 This much for the Internall Adiuncts The Externall, I call such as are not imprest into the Earth, but externally adjacent or adioyning vnto it. Here ought wee to consider the Aire adioyning to any place with his Qualities and Proprieties. 13 The Ayrie properties of a place consist in such matters, wherewith the Ayre according to diuerse places is diuersly affected and dis∣posed. In the Ayre we ought to note a twofold temper and quality, the one Inbred and Essentiall : the other Externall and Acciden∣tall, he former, whether it bee heat ioyned with moisture, as Aristotle a irmes, or cold ioyned with moisture, as some others, I leaue it to the Naturall Philosopher to dispute. The latter be∣ing that to which our purpose is chiefly ingaged, and that no far∣ther then may appertaine to the Topicall description of a speci∣all Countrey. These accidents being so various and many, we are inforced to reduce them to a few generall heads which we will couch in this our Theoreme. 1 The disposition of the Ayre adjacent to a place depends chiefely on the Temperament of the Soyle. Those things wherewith the Aëri ll Region is affected, are of two sorts; to wit, either the Temperament consisting in the mix∣ture of the foure first Qualities ; or else the bodies themselues, as Meteors drawne vp into the Aire, whereof these accidentall dispositions arise. That both these chiefly depend from the Temp rament of the Earthly Soyle of a certaine place, many rea∣sons will demonstrate: first that Meteors, whatsoeuer they are, take their originall from the Earth, is plaine. 1 Out of the name, which signifies things lifted vp, to shew that a Meteor is lifted and drawne out of the Earth. 2 Out of the materiall composition, which can no where else take this composition: For either wee should deriue it from the Heauens, or from the Ayre it selfe, or from the Fire: From the Heauens it cannot take originall: because it is corruptible, and therefore of no heauen∣ly substance according to Peripateticke Philosophie. Not from it selfe, because the aire being supposed a simple and vncom∣pounded body, cannot admit of such mixture. Not from the Fire ; first because all Meteors partake not of fierie nature. Se∣condly, because fire cannot well subsist, but of some matter whereon it may worke, and conserue it selfe, which can bee no other then that which is of a glutinous substance: which wee no where finde but in the earthly Globe, consisting of Earth and Water; out of whose store-houses, the matter of all such pen∣dulous substances in the aire is deriued. These Meteors may bee deriued from the Earth into the Aire, two manner of wayes. First, Directly and immediatly, by an immediate ascent or ri∣sing of exhalations from some one particular place into the Ay∣rie space right ouer it. Secondly, Obliquely, to wit, when Vapours, or other such exhalations are by some violence or o∣ther carried from one place into another: as winde, which be∣ing ingendred in one place, continually bloweth into another. Againe, the former may happen two wayes: for either this ri∣sing of Exhalations out of the Earth, is Ordinary, or Extraor∣dinary: Ordinary I call that whereby the thinne parts of the water or Earth are continually spread and diffused through the whole Region of the Ayre: for wee cannot imagine otherwise then that at all times and places, the Terrestriall Globe com∣posed of Earth and Water, continually sends and euaporates out some thinne or rarified parts, wherewith the earth is affe∣cted. Whether this Rarefaction or Euaporation of the water bee the true substance of the Aire it selfe (as some haue pro∣bably coniectured) or else s me other body different from it, I will not here dispute. This much will necessarily follow, that it proceeds originally from the Earth right vnder it. This va∣pour being ingendred from the water or moister parts of the Earth; is much varied and temper'd according to the place from which it ariseth: For the matter of the Earth being vari∣ous and diuerse in disposition, as well in regard of various veines of minerall substances, whereof it consists, as of the first and se∣cond qualities thereof arising, must of necessity cause the Aire about each Region to bee of the same quality. Whence a pro∣bable reason may bee shewne; why of two places, although both like in respect of the Heauens, and other circumstances, one should bee hot, the other cold; one healthie, another con∣tagious; the one of a sharpe and thinne aire, the other of a foggy & dull temper: For no question but the minerall matter where∣of the soile of the Earth consists, being not euery where Solid and hard, but euery where intermedled with a vaporous and fluide substance, must needs challenge a great interest in the tem∣perament of the Ayre, a that which is the first mother, if not of the Aire it selfe, yet at least of the accidentall dispositions there∣of. The Extraordinary euaporations, I call such as arise out of the Earth by some extraordinary concurse of the Sunne, with some other Starres. These are many times subiect to sense, which happen not at all times and places: such as are clowdes, windes, and such like, which arise not naturally by their owne accord by a perpetuall emanation, but are by some greater strength of the Sunne or Starres ratifying the parts of the earth or water drawne vp to the Aire about it. Now for the Meteors Indirectly and obliquely belonging to any place, amongst many other instances, we may bring the winde which bloweth from one Region to another; which according to ordinary ex∣perience partaketh of a twofold quality; the one deriued from the place whence it is ingendred; the other from the Region through which it passeth. Which may appeare by our foure Cardinall windes, as they are with vs in England, Belgia, and higher Germany. For first our Easterne winde is found to bee driest of all others, whereof no other cause can bee giuen, then that it comes ouer a great Continent of land lying towards the East, out of which many drie and earthly exhalations are drawn: so the Westerne winde is obserued to be very moist, because it passeth ouer the hugie Atlanticke Ocean, which must needs cast forth many watrie and moist vapours, which beget raine and showres: from the moisture of which Westerne winde some haue sought out an answer to that Probleme: why hun∣ting hounds should not sent, nor hunt so well, the winde being in the West, as at other times? For, say they, it is caused by the moisture of it, either in making hinderance to their legges in running, or at least to their smell, being very thicke and foggy. In this Westerne winde we may also perceiue much cold, which is caused by the quality of those watrie vapours, through which it passeth, which being drawne from the water, are na∣turally cold. In our South wind wee shall finde both heat and moisture: whereof the former ariseth from the Sunne, which in those Southerne Regions neere the Equatour is most predo∣minant; The latter from the naturall disposition of the places because before it approacheth our coasts, it passes ouer the Mediterranean Sea, out of which the Sunne begets abundance of watry vapours, which mixt themselues with the windes. Fi∣nally the North-winde is obserued to bee cold and drye. It must of necessity bee cold: because it is carried ouer diuerse cold and snowy places, most remote from the heat of the Sunne. It is drie; because it passeth ouer many Ilands and dry places, sen∣ding out store of dry exhalations: as also because the Sunne be∣ing very remote from those Regions, fewer exhalations are drawne vp, which might infect it by impressions of their wa∣trie quality. These instances may serue to proue our assertion: That Meteors, wherewith the Aire is vsually charged, and by consequence, their qualit es imprest into the Aire, are depen∣ding from the Earth, out of which they are drawne, either Di∣rectly from the same Region which they affect; or Obliquely, from some other Region remote from it. Howsoeuer, wee ob∣serue, that the disposition of the Ayre depends from the Soile, wee cannot altogether exclude the Heauens, as shall bee taught hereafter in place conuenient. CHAP. III. Of the Adiuncts of a place in respect of Heauens. 1 W E haue in the former Chapter spoken of the Adiuncts of a place in respect of it Selfe. We are now to proceed to such Accidents as agree to a place, in respect of the Heauens. 2 The Adiuncts of the Earth in respect of the Heauens are of two sorts; either Generall or Speciall. Generall, I call such as are abstracted from any speciall quality, or condition of the Earth, or any place in the Earth. These acci∣dents concerne either the Situation of the Inhabitants, or the Diuision of the places: both which we haue handled in our Sphe∣ricall part of Geographie : The Speciall are such as concerne the nature of the place in respect of the Heauens, not Absolutely, but Respecting some speciall qualities or properties depending on such situation; which more properly belongs to this part: For the vnfolding of which, before we descend to particularities, we will premise this one generall Theoreme. 1 Places according to their diuerse situation in regard of the Heauens, are diuersly affected in quality and constitution. This Proposition needs no proofe, as being grounded on or∣dinary experience: for who findes not betwixt the North and the South, a manifest difference of heat and cold, moisture and drouth, with other qualities thereon depending, as well in the temper of the soyle it selfe, as the naturall disposition of the in∣habitants. Only three points will here require an exposition: First, by what Meanes and instruments the Heauens may bee said to worke on the Earth. Secondly, how farre this opera∣tion of the Heauen, on the Earth may extend, and what limits it may suffer. Thirdly, how these operations are distinguished one from the other. Concerning the first, wee are taught by our ordinary Philosophers, that the Heauens worke on inferiour bodies by three instruments, to wit, Light, Motion. and Influ∣ence. By Light, as by an instrumentall agent, it ingendreth heat in the Aire and Earth; not that the light being in a sort an Immateriall quality, can immediatly of it selfe produce heat, being materiall and elementary; But by attrition and rarefa∣ction, whereby the parts of the aire being made thinner, ap∣proach neerer to the nature of fire, and so conceaue heat. This is againe performed two wayes; either by a simple or compo un∣ded beame. The simple Ray is weaker: The compounded in∣ferring a doubling of the Ray by Reflection, is stronger and of more validity in the operation: and by consequence so much the more copious in the production of heat, by how much more the reflection is greater: if wee meerely consider it in re∣gard of the Heauens, without any consideration of the quality of the Earth. By motion the heauens may exercise their opera∣tion on the Earth two wayes. First, by attenuating and rarefy∣ing the vpper part of the Aire next adioyning, turning it into Fire, (as some Philosophers would haue it) whence the inferi∣our parts of the ayre communicating in this affection must needs partake some degrees of heat; But this I hold to bee a con∣ceit grounded onely vpon Aristotles authority; who suppo∣sed the heauens to bee a solide compact body: which will not so soone bee granted of many more moderne Mathematicians. Secondly, the heauenly bodyes may bee said to worke on inferi∣our things by motion; in that by motion they are diuersly dis∣posed and ordered to diuerse Aspects and configurations of the Starres and Planets, whereby they may produce diuerse ef∣fects: so that in this sense the heauens are imagined as a dispo∣nent cause, which doth not so much produce the effects them∣selues as vary the operation. Hereon is grounded all Astrolo∣gie, as that which out of diuerse aspects and combinations of the Planets and Signes foresheweth diuerse euents. The third Instrument, by which the Heauens are said to worke, is the heauenly influence; which is a hidden and secret quality not subiect to sense, but only knowne and found out by the effects. This third agent being by some questioned, would hardly bee beleeued; but that a necessity in nature constraines it. For ma∣ny effects are found in inferiour bodies, caused by the heauens, which can no way bee ascribed to the Light or Motion. As for example, the production of Mettals in the bowels of the earth, the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea; whereof neither the one or the other can challenge any great interest in the Light : For as much as the former is farre remote from the Sunne-beames: the other ceaseth not to moue in his channell, when the Sunne and Moone are both vnder the Earth. Besides, who can giue a reason of the excesse of heat in the Canicular or Dog-dayes, if hee exclude this influence? For if wee consider the Light of the Sunne, wee shall finde it greater at the time of the So stice ; the reflection being greater approaching neerer to right Angles. If wee consider the Earth, wee shall finde no reason at all, why the heat should be more predominant at this time then another. Then must wee of necessity ascribe it to a speciall Influence of the Dog-starre being in coniunction with the Sunne. Many o∣ther Instances might bee here produced, but I hold it needlesse, being a matter consented to amongst most Philosophers. The second point concernes the Extent and limitation of this opera∣tion in inferiour bodyes: for vnfolding of which point, wee must know that this operation may haue respect either to the Elements of Earth and Aire, or else to the Inhabitants residing on the Earth. For the operation of the Heauens vpon the Ele∣mentary masse, experience it selfe will warrant; yet with this limitation, that this operation is measured and squared accor∣ding to the matter whereinto it is receaued: as for example, wee shall finde the Moone more operatiue and predominant in moist Bodyes, then in others, partaking lesse of this quality. Likewise the heat caused by the Sunne more feruent where it meets with a subiect which is more capable. Whence it comes to passe that one Countrey is found hotter then another, although sub∣iect to the same Latitude in respect of the Heauens: for howso∣euer the action of the Heauens bee alwayes the same and vni∣forme in respect of the Heauen it selfe, yet must the same bee measured and limited according to the subiect into which it is imprest. For the Inhabitants, wee are to distinguish in them a twofold nature: the one Materiall as partaking of the Ele∣ments, whereof euery mixt body is compounded. The other spirituall, as that of the Soule. The former wee cannot exempt from the operation of the Heauens: for as much as euery Physi∣cian can tell how much the humours and parts of our body are stirred by celestiall influence, especially by the Moone, accor∣ding to whose changes our bodies dayly vndergoe an alterati∣on. For the humane soule, how farre it is gouerned by the stars is a matter of great consequence; yet may wee in some sort cleere the doubt by this one distinction. The Heauens may bee said to haue an operation vpon the soule two manner of wayes. First, Immediatly by it selfe. Secondly, Mediately by the hu∣mours and corporeall organes, whereof the Soules operation de∣pends. The first wee absolutely deny; for the soule being an immateriall substance, cannot bee wrought vpon by a materiall agent, as Philosophers affirme: for the second, it may bee gran∣ted without any absurdity: For the operation of the soule de∣pends meerely on materiall and corporeall organes. The Ele∣mentary matter, whereof these organes consist, are subiect to the operation of the Heauens, as any other Elementary mat∣ter. So that wee may affirme the Heauens in some sort to go∣uerne mens mindes and dispositions, so farre forth as they de∣pend vpon the bodily instruments. But here wee must note by the way, that it is one thing to inferre a Necessity ; another thing to giue an Inclination. The former we cannot absolutely auerre; for as much as mans will, which is the commandresse of his a∣ctions, is absolutely free not subiect to any naturall necessity, or externall coaction. Yet can wee not deny a certaine inclination; for as much as the soule of a man is too much indulgent vnto the body, by whose motion it is rather perswaded then com∣manded. The third point we haue in hand, is to shew how ma∣ny wayes the Heauens by their operation can affect and dispose a place on the Earth. Here wee must note that the operation of the Heauens in the Earth is twofold; either ordinary or extra∣ordinary. The ordinary is againe twofold; either variable or Inuariable. The variable I call that which is varyed according to the season, as when the Sunne by his increase or decrease of heat, produceth Summer or Winter, Spring, or Autumne: which operation depends from the motion of the Sunne in his Eclip∣ticke line, wherein hee comes sometimes neerer vnto vs, some∣times goeth f rther from our verticall point. The Inuariable, I call that, whereby the same places are supposed to inioy the same temperament of heat or cold without any sensible diffe∣rence in respect of the Heauens; putting aside other causes and circumstances: for how soeuer euery Region is subiect to these foure changes, to wit, Summer, Winter, Spring, and Autumne: yet may the same place inioy the same temperament of Sum∣mer and Winter one yeere as it doth another without any great alteration: and this depends from the situation of any place neerer or farther of in respect of the Equinoctiall circle. The Extraordinary operation of the Heauens depends from some extraordinary combination or concurse of Planets particular∣ly affecting some speciall place; whence the cause may bee probably shewed why some place should some eeres proue extraordinary fruitfull, other times degenerate againe to barren∣nesse: or why it should sometimes bee molested with too much drouth, and other times with too much moisture. To let passe the other considerations as more appertaining to an Astrolo∣ger then a Geographer, wee will here onely fasten on the Inua∣riable operation of the Heauens on earthly places; and search how farre forth the places of the Earth are varied in their Tem∣per & Quality, according to their diuerse situations, and respect to the Equinoctiall circle; taking onely notice of the Diurnall and ordinary motion of the Sunne in his course. Herein shall wee finde no small variety, not onely in the temper of the Ayre, but also in the disposition and complection of the Inhabitants: both which we shall more specially declare: the former in this Chapter▪ the other in due place: wherein we shall haue occasi∣on to treat of the materiall constitution and manners of diuerse Nations. 2 In respect of the Heauens, a place may be di∣uided two wayes: First, into the North and South. Secondly, into the East and West. 3 Any place is said to be Northerne which lyeth betwixt the Equatour and Arcticke Pole. South∣erne, betwixt the Equatour and the Antarcticke-Pole. The whole Globe of the Earth (as we haue formerly taught) is diuided by the Equatour into two Hemispheares; whereof the one is called Northerne, lying towards the Northerne or Arcticke Pole: the other towards the other Pole is called the Southerne. But here to cleere all doubt, wee must vnderstand that a place may be said to be Northerne or Southerne two man∣ner of wayes: either Absolutely or Respectiuely : Absolutely Northerne and Southerne places are tearmed, when they are si∣tuated in the Northerne or Southerne Hemispheares, as wee haue taught in this Definition; But such as are Respectiuely Northerne, may be vnderstood of such Regions, whereof the one is situate neerer the Pole, the other neerer the Equatour. In the first place here wee are to consider a place as it is absolutely taken to be either North or South: Concerning which we will particularly note these two Theor mes. 1 Northerne and Southerne places alike situate, generally inioy a like disposition. Wee haue formerly granted to euery Region or Countrey a speciall quality or temper: although lying or situate vnder the same Latitude. But here excluding all concurrent causes which may vary the temper of the Soile, wee consider the disposition of a place so farre forth as it depends on the Heauenly Influence o operation. In which sense we cannot deny to a place of like , a like nature, for as Philosophers vse to speake, Simile qua simile semper aptum natum est simile producere: Like causes al∣wayes produce like effects: so the Heauens in like distance, be∣ing disposed alike as well in regard of Light as Influence ▪ can∣not but affect hose parts of the Earth in the selfe-same man∣ner. For the Instruments by which the heauens worke on infe∣riour bodies (as we haue shewed) are Light and Influence ▪ For both the Light and Influ nce, it is certaine that in places of e∣quall Latitude and respect to the Equatour; it is cast equally: both the one and he other being imagined to bee carried in di∣rect l es of which with the Horizon makes like An∣gles. Now that the validity or weaknesse of the operatiue Rayes is to bee iudged according to the Right or Oblique incidency, making right or oblique Angles, no Mathematician will gaine say. But here we must note by the way, that wee only consider the Heauen a ording to his generall Inf ence or operation depending chiefly on the Sunne: not of the speciall operation of speciall Starres, for it may be some particular constellations in the Northerne Hemispheare may bee indowed with some spe∣ciall influence, which is not found in the Southerne; or the South in this kinde goe beyond the North. But this kinde of Influ∣ence is rare and hard to f nde, by reason of the various mixture of diuerse constellations in their operation in the same subiect: and howsoeuer it were well knowne, yet it is not so notable to take place before this com on Rule, which wee shall finde to take place, if not exactly, yet commonly throughout the whole Terrestriall Spheare. Thus Bodin shewes a great likenesse be∣twixt the higher Germany, and the kingdome of the Pantagones, in the South part of America, out of the great Stature of the Inhabitants, which must needs proceed out of the nature of the places, which are found to be situate very neere vnder the same Parallell. The like correspondency haue wee noted betwixt Guinea in Africke and that part (as it is thought) of the South Continent, which they haue for this cause tearmed Noua Guinea ▪ many more Parallells in this kinde might be found out; but these may suffice in so euident a matter. 2 The Northerne Hemispheare is the Mascu∣line, the Southerne the Feminine part of the Earth. It hath beene a vsuall kinde of speech amongst men to tearme such things as are stronger, worthier, or greater, Masculine : on the contrary side such things Feminine as are found defici∣ent and wanting in these perfections: by which kinde of Me∣taphor taken from the Sexes in liuing creatures they haue as∣cribed to the Northerne Hemispheare a Masculine Temper in respect of the Southerne, which comes fa re short of it: for howsoeuer no cause can bee shewed in regard of the Heauens (as is taught in our former propositions) except by some speci∣all constellations of the South, which is full of vncertainty, and as soone denied as affirmed; yet comes it to passe by some hidden propertie of the places themselues, or at least some casuall Ac∣ ident or other, tha these two Hemispheares suffer a great and notable disparity. For against the large and fertill Territories of the Northerne Hemisphe re containing in it wholy Europe and Asia, with the greatest part of America and Africa, wee shall finde (besides some few scattered Ilands) only three con∣tinents to oppose, to wit, a small part of Africke, the greatest part of America Per ana, containing in it Peru, Brasile ▪ and the Region of the P ntag n s, a d the South cont nent called T r∣ra Australi Inc gnita, and by some others, the South Indies. For the former lying neere the Cape of good hope, if we will cre∣dit the relations of our owne Merchants, we shall finde the aire by reason of , very di mp rated▪ situat betwixt the Equa∣tour and the Tropicke of Capric r : The land very barren, the Inhabitants of a br tish d osition, wanting (a it were) all sense of science or religion: bearing heauy as yet the curse of Noah, the first Father of that African Nation. For America Peruana wee shall finde it perhaps more happy in respect of the Soyle, although little better in respect of the Inhabitants. Yet for the plentie of Gold-mines, wh reof they can chiefly vaunt, wee shall finde it farre surmounted by the East Indies, or at least paralelled by America, Mexicana, lying on this side the Equi o tiall rcl . For other commodities, as Cattle, Fruit , Herbag , Spi e , Gumm , and other medicinable roots, and miner lls, lesse question can be made, as being farre inferi∣our to Europe, Asia, Mexicana and other Regions included within ou Northerne partition. Of the third and greatest, which is the South continent, no coniecture can be well groun∣ded, being in manner all vndiscouered, except some small quillets on the borders of it▪ by which, if wee may iudge of all the rest, wee shall almost giue the same iudgement, as of the o∣ther. The want of discouery in this age of ours, wherein Naui∣gation th beene perfected and cherished, is no small argu∣ ent inferiour in commodities to other places: Neith had he lacknesse of the Spaniard giue that occas on of complaint to Ferdinand de Qui , the late discouerer of some of these parts, had not the Spanish King thought such an expe∣dition eithe altogether frui lesse, or to little purpose. For who k owes not the Sp niard to bee N tion s couetous of richesse as ambitious to pursue oueraignty: as such who will more w llingly expo the liues of their owne sub ects, then loose the least title ouer other Countreyes. This may bee a pro∣bable argument, that th s Continent hath not as yet so well smiled on the ambition of this prowd Nation, as some other conq sts. For Politicall and Martiall affaires, how farre short i con s of our Northerne Hemi pheare▪ I shall speake in due place, where I shall handle the disposition of diuerse inhabitants according to their situation. To finde out the true causes of this diuersity, is very diff cult: To seek a reason in some particular conste ation, and in the Heauens, or some sp ciall disposition of the soy ▪ is too generall to giue sa∣tisfaction, and too vnc rtaine to i orce cr dulity. Yet put∣ting these aside, I can only guesse at two reasons, which are ac∣cidentall, yet strengthned with good probability. The first and greatest is that bitter curse cas on Cha and his post rity by his father Noah, which no doubt was seconded by Gods diplea∣sure taking place in his habitation. Th all these Nations sprung from Cham, dare not confidently auouch: Yet for the most part, it is probable they were of this Race. For the Afri∣cans it is out of question , as warranted by the holy Scripture▪ and it is not vnlikely hat many of those people fetcht their first originall from them▪ The second cause may bee drawne from the Industrie and labour of the inhabitants in til∣lage and manuring of the ground, wherein the So herne in∣habitant hath beene more defici nt. Fo it is certaine out of the holy Scripture that Noahs Arke, wher in was th Seminary of mankinde, and almost all other liu g , rested in he Northerne part of the world: whence both man and beasts be∣ganne to be propagated toward the South punc; no farther then ne∣cessity enforced: the Regions inhabited g wing daily more and more populous, and (as i were) groaning to bee deliuered o some of her children. Hence may bee inferred wo consec a∣ries. First, that the Northerne Hemispheare was soo∣ner, and is now therefore ore populous then the Southerne. Secondly, that the chiefest and principall men, which were best seated rath r chose to keepe their ancient habitation, sending such abroad, who could either bee best spared, or had the smal∣lest possessions at home. Yet notwithstanding it cannot be ima∣gined but they retained with them a sufficient company and more then went away. Out of which it must needs be granted, that the Northerne halfe of the Earth being best inhabited, should be best manured and cultured; from whence the ground must in time proue more fruitfull and commodious for habita∣tion: for as a fruitfull Countrey for want of the due manuring and tillage doth degenerate and waxe barren, so diuerse barren and sterill Countreyes haue by the industrie of the Inhabitants beene brought to fertilitie, and made capable of many good commodities necessary for mans life. If I were curious to draw arguments from the nature of the Heauens; I could alleage the Greatnesse and Multitude of Starres of the greater magnitude in our Northerne Hemispheare, wherein the Southerne is defici∣ent, as also the longer soiourning of the Sun in our Northerne Hemispheare: but these as vncertaine causes I passe ouer Other reasons may perchance bee found out by those who are inquisi∣tiue into the secrets of nature, to whom I leaue the more exact search of these matters. 4 Either Hemispheare consisting of 90 Degrees may be diuided into three parts, each of them containing 30 Degrees. 5 Of these parts 30 we allot for Heat, 30 for Cold, and 30 for Temperature: whereof the former lyeth towards the Equatour, the second towards the Pole; the third betwixt both. The ancient Cosmographers (as wee haue shewed in our former Treatise) diuided the whole Globe of the Earth in∣to fiue Zones, which they supposed had also proportionally di∣uided the Temper and disposition of the Earth. In such sort that according to the Degrees of Latitude the Heat and Cold should in rease or diminish. Which rule of theirs had beene ve∣ry certaine, were there no other causes concurrent in the dis∣position of the Earth and Ayre, but onely the Heauens. But si∣thence that many other concurrent causes, as we haue shewed, mixe themselues with these celestiall operations, and the ex∣periment of Nauigatours haue found out a disproportion in the quality, in respect of the Distance, some later writers haue sought out a new pertition more consonant to naturall expe∣rience. The whole Latitude of the Hemispheare consisting of 90 Degrees from the Equatour to the Pole, they haue diuided into three parts, allowing 30 Degrees toward the Equatour to Heat; 30 Degrees towards the Pole to Cold; and the other 30 Degrees lying betwixt both to Temperature. These 30 Degrees for Imagination sake they haue subdiuided againe, each of them into two parts contayning 15 Degrees a peece: more particularly to designe out the speciall disposition of each Region, lying either Northward or Southward from the E∣quatour, which is the bound betwixt both Hemispheares. In the first section of 30 Degrees lying Northward from the E∣quatour, wee comprehend in Africke, Numidia, Nigritarum Regio, Lybia, Guinia, Nubia, Egypt, Ethiopia superior. In Asia; Arabia, India, Insulae Philippinae. In America, Noua Hispania, Hispaniola, Cuba, with other parts of America Mexicana. In the other extreame section from 60 Degrees of Latitude to the Pole, wee comprehend in Europe, Groenland, Island, Friesland, Norwey, Suethland for the most part, Noua Zembla. In Asia, a great part of Scythia Orientalis. In America, Anian, Quivira with diuerse other parts of the North of America Mexicana. In the middle betwixt both, betwixt 30 and 60 Degrees of Latitude wee comprehend in Africa, Barbarie ; in Europe, all the kingdomes except those North Prouinces before named, and almost all Asia, except some places toward the South, as Arabia, India, and the Philippinae Insulae, formerly placed in the first Section; In like manner may we diuide the Southerne He∣mispheare into three Sections: In the first, from the Equatour 30 Degrees we place in Africke, Congo, Monomotapa, Madagas∣car: In the Southerne Tract, Beach, and Noua Guinia, with ma∣ny Ilands thereunto adioyning, as many of the Philippinae In∣sulae, with Insulae Solomonis. In America, Peru, Tisnada, Brasilia, with the most part of that Region which they call America Pe∣ruana. In the other extreame Section from 60 Degrees to the Antarctike Pole, is couched the most part of that great land scarce yet discouered, called Terra Australis Incognita. In the middle Region betwixt both, from 30 to 60 Degrees, shall wee finde placed in America, the Region of the Pantagones, in the Sou∣therne Continent, Maletur, Iauaminor, with many others. In discouering the qualities of these seuerall Sections or partitions of the earth, our chiefest discourse must be addressed to the Nor∣therne Hemispheare, as that is more discouered and knowne a∣mongst old and new writers; by which according to the former Proposition one may parallell the other; concerning which wee will inferre these Propositions. 1 In the first Section of the Hemispheare the first 15 Degrees from the Equatour are found some∣what Temperate; the other 15 about the Tro∣picks exceeding Hot. That the Region lying vnder the Equatour is Temperately hot, contrary to the opinion almost of all the Ancients, hath beene in part proued heretofore, as well by reason, as experi∣ment: for that all places by how much the neerer they ap∣proach the Equatour, by so much more should bee hotter (as some imagine) diuerse instances will contradict. It is reported by Aluarez that the Abyssine Embassadour arriuing at Lisbone in Portugall, was there almost choaked with extreame heat. Also P rguer the Germane, relates that hee hath felt the wea∣ther more hot about Dantzicke, and the Balticke Sea, then at Tholouse in a eruent Summer. The causes which wee haue be∣fore touched, are chiefly two. The first is, that the Sun is higher in this orbe in respect of those vnder the Equatour, and mo∣ueth more swiftly from them, spending on them onely twelue houres, whence so great an impression of heat cannot bee made as in other places: for heat being a materiall quality, must ne∣cessarily require some Latitude of time to bee imprest into the ayre, or any other subiect. From the Diminution of heat in the Region must the ayre needs receaue into it selfe the contrary quality of cold. An argument of cold may bee drawne from the testimony of Alvarez ; who affirmes the waters there in the month of Iune, to bee frozen ouer with Ice, the South winde blowing. The second cause is by iudicious writers, ascribed to the subtility and rarity of the Aire vnder the Equinoctiall line, which cannot rec aue into it selfe so many degrees of heat as the thicke and grosse aire of diuers places distant. For the North Region, wherein Europe, and a great part of Asia is placed, is for the most part full of waters, which bursting out of secret and vnknowne concauities, doe produce infinite Fennes, Gogges, Lakes, and Marishes, which in the Summer season cause infinite vapours to abound, which being intermixed with heat, scorch and heat more feruently then the purer ayre of Africke, being for the most part free from the mixture and concurse of such slimie vapours. That the aire being thickned should yeeld a greater feruour, euery man out of ordinary experience can frame to himselfe an argument: For wee see Fire and Heat be∣ing incorporated (as it were) in the Steele or Iron, to burne and heat more then in Aire or Wood. The like reason some would draw from the keepers of Sto es or Hot houses, which doe besprinkle the ground with water, that the vapour being con∣tracted and the aire thickned, they may the longer and better maintaine heat, and spare Fuell. Another cause (which we haue formerly touched) may bee drawne from the Set and Anniuer∣windes which blow most part of the yeere one way. Iosephus Acosta obserues that betwixt the Tropicks, the winde is for the most part Easterly, beyond Westerly: and a Dutch-disco∣uerer hath related that in Guinea they haue a certaine winde which comes from the land till noone: and then very violent from the Sea, in so much as the Inhabitants are wont to trafficke in the morning being not able to indure it: which if it bee true wee cannot imagine this Region to bee so hot as men suppose. For here the heat in the night is asswaged, by the absence or re∣motenesse of the Sunne: Likewise the excesse of heat incident to noonetide, is much qualified (or as it should seeme by this relation) altogether vanquished by the cold winde deriued from the Sea. Another reason no lesse probable may be deriued from the excessiue height of the land and great mountaynes, ob∣serued to bee neere or vnder the line, whose tops are alwayes couered with Snow, which giue a sufficient testimony of cold: For instance, wee need goe no farther then the ridge of the mountaines And in America, where they obserued the Ayre to be so hinne and cold, that it inforced them to scowre and vomit, which came neere it. The like whereof is related of another cal∣led Punas, where the extremity of cold cutteth off their hands: From which experience wee may finde some places neere the Line to bee more infested with cold heat. The la t and greatest eason may bee taken from the continuall moisture wherewith the regions situate betwixt the Tropicks frequent∣ly abound. This moisture is deriued from two causes; 1 From the melting of the Snow on the tops of the mountaines by the Sunne, which running from thence continually into the vallies; keepe them almost alwayes watrish, especially in the midst of Summer when the Sunne is neerest. 2 From the extreame heat of the Sunne, which being very neere, and many times verti∣call, rayseth vp continually moist vapours in great quantity. These vapour in so short a time as 12 houres, being not con∣sumed but meeting with the cold from the middle Region of the aire, are therewith conuerted into drops, which fall downe againe in great showres: in so much as some trauellers of good credit haue told me, that all the while they sayled betwixt the Tropicks, they seldome saw the Sunne, by reason of raine and clowdy vapours. Whence wee note with Iosephus Acosta, by way of consectary, that the presence of the Sunne betwixt the Tropicks produceth moisture, but contrariwise without the Tropicks, it is the cause of drouth: whence the inhabitants inioy as it were a Winter, when the Sun is to them verticall, because of the distemperature by Windes, Raines, and Stormes, and great Inundations, whereunto commonly all great riuers be∣twixt the Tropicks are most subiect. Also they seeme to haue a Summer, when the Sunne is in or neere the Tropicks because being somewhat remoued, he cannot bee so powerfull in drawing such store of vapours and exhalations which hee can dispell and consume. Thus wee see the moity of this first Se∣ction lying 15 degrees from the Equatour, how soeuer sub∣iect to a greater reflection of the Sunne-beames, yet through the concurrence of other causes to bee found indifferently Tem∣perate, and the other 15 degrees about the Tropicks, howsoe∣uer subiect to a lesser Reflection to bee excessiue hot: which later cause, besides all which hath beene said before, shall bee further confirmed hereafter by the complection of the natiue Inhabitants, which wee shall finde to bee Choller-adust, the true symptome of an externall heat. But if any man shall answer that this accident is incident as well to the Regions situate vn∣der the Equatour, as to that vnder the Tropicks, I will pro∣duce another reason drawne from the colour of their counte∣nances; which vnder the Equatour is not seene so blacke and swarthie as elsewhere. For toward the Tropicke, is placed the Land of Blackmores or Nigritarum Regio, where the people are all coleblacke: which might perhaps happen also to those that dwell vnder the other Tropicke; but that other causes in∣terpose themselues, which hinder the excesse of heat, which is taken to be the chiefe cause of this blacknesse; Here some would oppose the opinion of Herodotus, which referred the cause of this blacknesse in the Negroes, to the Seed which hee would haue to bee blacke: others would haue this blacknesse as a curse inflicted vpon Chams posterity: but these opinions carry very little shew of probability. For first, if this former opinion were admitted, it would of necessity follow (saith Boden ) that E∣thiopians in Scythia should alwayes bee borne blacke, and Scy∣thians in Ethiopia should bee alwayes white. For as much as all nations from the beginning of the world haue beene confused and mixt by the distinction of Colonies: but experience teacheth vs, that men trasplanted into another Soyle, will in manner of trees and Plants by little and little degenerate and change their first disposition. As if a Blackmore marry and beget chil∣dren here with vs in England, experience will plainely declare the children to be more inclining to whitenesse then the fathers and the grand children more then them. Secondly, if the second opinion of Chams curse deserued any credit; I see no reason why all his posterity (such as by most writers consent, are gene∣rally the people of Africke ) should not bee subiect to the same execration, as well as one little parcell of it. Moreouer it is re∣ported by Pline, and confirmed by Appian, that in those places are many blacke Lions, which we can ascribe to no other cause then the excesse of heat, and not to any quality of the Seed, or any curse inflicted on the place: Moreouer it is reported by Fer∣dinando de Quir in his late discouery of the South Continent▪ that hee there also found some blacke people; yet can wee not imagine this Land, though stretching very farre in quantity tow∣ard the Equinoctiall, to come so farre or much farther then the Tropicke of Capricorne. These arguments make it the more pro∣bable that the Regions situate vnder the Tropicks, generally exceed more in heat, then those placed in the middle of the Earth vnder the Line. 2 In the other extreame Section from 60 Degrees towards the Pole, the first 15 Degrees tow∣ards the Equatour are more moderately cold; the other towards the Pole most immode∣rately cold, and vnapt for conuenient Habita∣tion. That this Section of 30 Degrees comprehended betwixt the 60 Degree and the Pole, is in a sort habitable, is confirmed by the testimony of many Nauigatours, especially the English and Hollanders ; who haue aduentured very farre Northward, and haue there found the Earth, though not so fruitfull, yet furni∣shed with some commodities, and peopled with Inhabitants. The first 15 Degrees towards the Equatour admit of no great exception, containing in their extent Finmarke, Bodia, in Scan∣dia, Noua Zembla, Auian, Groenland, with many other places indifferently discouered: where they haue indeed found the aire very cold in regard of this of ours: Yet not so Immoderate, but that it can at all times agree with the naturall temper of the natiue Inhabitants, and at least at some times of the yeere admit a passage for forraigne Nations. But the other Region stretching Northward from 75 Degrees to the Pole it selfe, howsoeuer it may bee probably thought habitable, yet affords it no conuenient meanes and sustenance for mans life, in respect of other places; neither can the people of this climate inioy any good complection or Temperament of the foure qualities; for as much as the cold with them is so predominant, that it choak∣eth, and almost extinguisheth the naturall h at: whence Hy∣pocrates saith that they are dryed vp, which is a cause of their swarty colour, and dwarfish stature; which assertion of his can obtaine no credit, but of such Northerne people as liue neere the Pole; Neuerthelesse wee shall not finde these poore Nor∣therne Nations, so destitute altogether of vitall aides, but that their wants are in some sort recompensed by the benefit of na∣ture. The chiefest comforts in this kinde, which wee inioy, and they seeme to want, are Heat and Light. The defect of heat is somewhat mollified; 1 By the Sunne staying so long aboue their Horizon as 6 months, and by consequence impressing into the Aire a greater degree of heat. 2▪ By the naturall custome of the Inhabitants, neuer acquainted with any other temperature: both which reasons wee haue formerly alleaged. 3 By the in∣dustrie of the Inhabitants, being taught by necessity to pre∣serue themselues during the Winter-time in Caues, Stoues, and such like places heated with continuall fires: the defect of which prouidence, was thought to bee the ruine of S r Hugh Willoughby, intending a search of the North-east passage on the North of Lapland and Russia. To recompense the defect of Light, Nature hath prouided two wayes: 1 In that the Sunne in his Parallell comming neerer and neerer to the Horizon, giues them a long time of glimmering light both before his rising and after his setting: which may serue them insteed of day. 2 For that the Sunne and Starres by reason of a refra tion, in a vapo∣rou and foggy Horizon, appe re o the sometime before hee is truly risen: which caused the Hollanders Noua Zombla, to wonder why they should see the Sunne diuerse dayes before ac∣cording to their account hee was to rise aboue their Horizon according to Astronomicall grounds: which probleme had stag∣gered all the Mathematicians of the world, had not the Perspe∣ctiue science stept in to giue an answer. 3 In the middle Section betwixt 30 and 60 Degrees of Latitude, the first 15 are Tem∣perately Hot, the other 15 more inclined to Cold. The middle Region partakes a mixture of both extreames, to∣wit, of the cold Region towards the Pole, and the hot towards the Equatour: whence it must needs follow, that the more any parts of this Tract approach the hot Region vnder the Tropicke and Equatour, the more it must partake of Heat: yet this heat being mittigated by some cold by reason of the fite of the Sunne, it must of necessity bee Temperate and very apt for humane ha∣bitation. Also this mixture of the cold quality being more exten∣ded and increased on the other moity towards the Pole through the vicinity of the cold Region, must loose much of the former heat, which shall hereafter bee more confirmed out of the na∣turall constitution and complection of the Inhabitants; bearing the true markes of externall cold and internall Heat, whereof the one is strengthened by the other: For the externall cold, if it be not ouer predominant, and too much for the internall Heat, will by an Antiperistasis keepe in and condensate this heat, mak∣ing it more feruent and vigorous. 6 The East and West Hemispheares are boun∣ded and diuided by the Meridian passing by the Canaries and the Molucco Ilands. 7 The East Hemispheare reacheth from the Ca∣naries the Moluccoes on this side; as the other on the opposite part of the Spheare. Wee may here note a great difference betwixt this diuision and the former. Fo the North and South Hemispheares being diuided by the Equatour, are parted (as it were) by Nature it selfe, and the Sunnes motion; But the diuision of the Globe in∣to East and West, wee can ascribe to no other cause, then mans Institution: yet are the Easterne and the Westerne found to di∣ffer many wayes, the discouery of which may giue great light to obseruation. 1 The Easterne Hemispheare wherein we liue is euery way happier and worthier then the other Westward. How farre short the Westerne Hemispheare comes of this of ours, many circumstances may declare. For first, if we compare the Quantity of Land, wee shall finde a great disparity. For the Westerne Hemispheare containes in it besides the Southerne Continent (wherein our also claimes a moity) onely America, with the Ilands thereunto adioyning: whereas the other with∣in this large circuit containes all the other parts of the Earth knowne vnto the Ancients, as Europe, Asia, and Africke, with many Ilands to them annexed. Moreouer it is probably con∣jectured by some, that America is vsually on our Mappes and Globes, especially the more ancient, painted and delineated out greater then indeed it is: which hath beene ascribed to the frau∣dulent deceit of the Portugalls heretofore; who to the end they might reduce the Molucco Ilands to the East Indies, then their owne possession; sought as well in their Mapps as relations to curtaile Asia, and inlarge America in such sort, as the Mo∣luc o Ilands might seeme to fall within the 180 Degrees East∣ward, wherein they fed themselues with vnknowne substance, and the Castilians with painted shadowes. But to let passe the quantity as a matter of lesse moment and lesse questioned; a great disparity will bee found in the Quality and D sposition : For what one commodity almost was euer found in this Con∣tinent, which is not onely parallelled, but surmounted by this our Hemispheare? If we compare the Mines of Gold and Siluer wherein consists the wealth and riches of both places; our East Indies will easily challenge the superiority. If Trees, Plants, Herbage and Graines, let our Physicians and Apothecaries iudge, who owe most of the medicinable drugges to India: Let our Merchants answer, which owe their Spices to Arabia, their Wine, to Spaine, Italy, the Mediterranean, Graecian, and Indian Ilands; their Silkes, Linnen, Cloathing, and their furniture al∣most wholly to Europe. If wee compare the multitude and va∣rious kindes of Beasts bred and nourished in either place, no question but Europe, Asia, and Africa can shew farre greater Heads of Sheepe, Cattle, and such like, with farre greater va∣riety of kindes, then euer were found in this new found Conti∣nent. If all these failed, yet the well tempered disposition of the Europaeans and Asians in respect of this barbarous and vnnur∣tured place, disdaines all comparison: where wee shall obserue on the one side a people long since reduced to ciuility, instructed as well in liberall sciences, as handy-crafts, armed with martiall discipline, ordered by Lawes and ciuill gouernment, bound with a conscience and sense of Religion; on the other side a multitude of miserable and wretched nations, as farre distant from vs inciuility, as place ; wanting not only Gouernment, Arts, Religion, and such helps, but also the desire, being senselesse of their owne misery. 2 The difference of East and West cannot worke a diuersitie in two places by any diuersity of the Heauens. East and West places compared together, are either of equall or vnequall Latitude. For places of vnequall Latitude no question can bee made, but they receaue a greater variety of Temper from the Heauens; as wee haue formerly proued: but this disparity growes not out of the diuersity of East and West, but the distance of North and South. But that places alike si∣tuate in Latitude, cannot vary by any diuersity of the heauens is plaine; for as much as all things to them rise and set alike, with∣out any diuersity: wherefore, if any such diuersity bee at any place found, we ought not to seeke the cause thereof in the hea∣uens, but rather in the condition of the Earth it selfe, which no question suffers in diuerse places of the same Latitude a great variety. 8 Either Hemispheare may againe Respectiuely be subdiuided into the West or East. The West in this our Hemispheare I call that which is neerer the Canary Ilands; the East that which lieth towards the Molucco Ilands ; to which points there are others correspondent in the other Hemispheare. 1 Places situate towards the East in the same La∣titude, are hotter then those which are placed tow∣ards the West. For the explanation of this Theoreme, we are to examine two matters; First, what probability may induce vs to beleeue the East to bee hotter temper then the West. Secondly, what should bee the cause of this diuersity in both places, being sup∣posed equally affected, in respect of the Heauens: for confir∣mation of the former, many reasons haue beene alleaged of old and late writers. It is agreed on (saith Bodin ) with a ioint con∣sent of the Hebrewes, Greeks, and Latines, that the East is bet∣ter tempered then the West: which hee labours to con∣firme; First, out of many speeches of zekiel, Esay, and the other Prophet , where the East seemes to challenge a dignity and prerogatiue aboue the West; which betokeneth (as he ima∣gines) a blessing of the one aboue the other. But I dare not venter on this Interpretation without a farther warrant. Se∣condly wee may here produce the testimony of Pliny in his se∣uenth booke, where hee affirmes that by ordinary obseruation, it is found that the pestilence commonly is carried from the East into the West, which Bodin testifies himselfe to haue found by experience in Galia Narbonensis, and many other history seemes to iustifie. Amianus a Greeke Author, obserues that Seleucia being taken, and a certaine porch of the Temple being opened, wherein were shut certaine secret mysteries of the Chaldeans ; that a suddaine contagion arose of incurable disea∣ses, which in the time of Marcus and Verus from the farther∣most ends of Persia, spread it selfe as farre as the Rh and France, and filled all the way with heapes of carkasses. If at a∣ny time the contagion bee obserued to bee carried another way, an vniuersall pestilence is feared: as according to the histories there happened not long after from Ethiopia towards the North, which infested the greatest part of the world. A third proofe may bee drawne from the testimony of Aristotle, Hip∣pocrates, Gallen, Ct sias, and other graue Aut ors, who affirme that all things are bred better and fairer in Asia then in Europe, which must needs argue a better temperature: To backe which Testimonies, we need goe no farther then moderne obseruati∣on. Euery Geographer will tell you how farre in fertility Na∣tolia in Asia surmounts Spaine ; and China, vnder the same La∣titude exceeds both: who knowes not how farre Fez and Mo∣rocco on the Westerne Verge of Africa, stand inferiour to E∣gypt, a most fruitfull and happy Region? And how farre short both these come of India, situate in the same Climate. An ar∣gument of greater heat in the Easterne places may bee the mul∣titude of Gold and Siluer-mines, Spices, and other such like com∣modities, wherein Asia excells Europe: whereas such met∣tals and commodities as require not so great a measure of heat in their con oction, are rather found in Europe then in Asia : whence there seemes to arise a certaine correspondency of the East with the South, and the West with the North. The grea∣test reason of all is taken from the Temper and naturall dispo∣sition of the Inhabitants, for as much as the European resembling the Northerne men, shewes all the Symptomes of inward heat strengthned with externall cold. The Asiaticke followes the di∣sposition of the Southerne man, whose inward heat is exhausted by externall scorching of the Sunne-beames, and therefore par∣takes more of Choll r-adust or melancholy. But this point wee shall more fully prosecute in due place. To shew a cause of this variety is very difficult. Those which in wit and learning haue farre exceeded my poore scantling, haue herein rather confessed their owne ignorance, then aduentured their iudgement. It were enough to satisfie an ingenuous minde, to beleeue that Almighty God was pleased in the first creation of the world to endow the Easterne part of the Earth with a better temper of the Soyle, from whence all the rest deriue their originall: which seemes not improbable, in that he made Asia the first resting place of man after the Creation, the second Seminary of mankinde after the Deluge, the onely place of our Sauiours Incarnation. In this matter I beleeue no lesse, and can speake no more, except I should vrge the beating of the great Atlanticke Ocean vpon our Westerne shoares; which may in some sort qualifie the ex∣cesse of heat incident to the Easterne tract, which may produce some degrees of Temperature. But here also wee shall perhaps meet with crosse instances, which will stirre vp more doubt th n satisfaction. CHAP. IV. Of the manner of Expression and Des∣cription of Regions. 1 H Auing treated of the generall Ad∣iuncts of places, wee are next to handle the manner of describing a Region, which proposeth vnto vs two points, the finding out the Position of two places, one in regard of the other. 2 The Translation of such places so found out into the Globe or Charte. 2 The former depends on the inuention of the Angle of Position by some Dioptricke Instru∣ment. This manner of description of a particular Region, seemes very necessary for a Geographer, which euery Mechanician may soone learne and practice▪ Many instruments haue beene deuised by curious Artificers for this purpose: whose vse hath beene set out largely by later writers, as by Gemma Frisius, Diggs, Hop∣ton, and others: to whom my reader may haue recourse, because I hold it not my taske in this subiect to describe the Instruments themselues; but briefly to shew the ground and vse of them; which these propositions shall expresse. 1 Diuerse places obserued at two or more Sta∣tions, by some Dioptricke Instrument, the situation of two places, one in regard of the o∣ther, may bee found out and expressed in a Plaine. This may sensibly bee shewed in the Figure following: to expresse which the more plainely▪ wee will set downe these Rules: 1 Let there bee drawne in some Chart or plaine plat∣forme, a right line, which wee must accompt to bee our Meri∣dian; because it shall afterward serue for that purpose. This right line shall be AB, whose two ends A and B shall bee taken for the North and South. 2 You must choose out of some high place, as a Towre or Mountaine, from whence you may be∣hold such cities, townes, castles, and other such notable places whereof you desire to know the situation and bearing of the one to the other▪ This High place is called the First Station ; where you must place the plaine before prepared in such sort, as it may Astronomically and truely agree with the true Meri∣dian of the place (whose inuention we haue taught in the first Booke) and so respect the foure Cardinall coasts, to wit, East, West, North, and South : Vpon this place seated in such a man∣ner of situation fasten your Dioptricke instrument, that it may bee turned about the point A on euery side at pleasure, in such sort, as the sight may be directed to euery one of the adiacent places. First then remouing it from A, direct your sight to F, and draw the line AF of indefinite length: likewise your Instrument be∣ing directed to G, draw the line AG infinitely, which by this meanes will also hit the place E: Let B also bee imagined a cer∣taine place, as a City, or Castle, situate in the very Meridian it selfe, which wee find already drawne to our hands. In like sort ought wee to proceede with the other places C and D, and as many as we please. This performed, you must remoue your selfe with your In∣strument and Plaine to some one of these places thus fore-mar∣ked out; as for example vnto D, which is called the second sta∣tion, and there as in the former, ascending vp some high place, the Plaine being first fitted and placed Astronomically, take the distance AD of any length whatsoeuer▪ for to the great∣nesse of this Distance, shall all the rest bee proportionall. Hence so place your Dioptricke Instrument at the place D, that it may bee turned round, and directed to all those places for∣merly obserued. In this sort leuelling your sight to the place or castle F, draw the line DF: so directing your sight to the rest, you may draw the lines DCG, DEDB; &c. Now by the points of Intersections of these lines, as in F, G, E, C, B, &c. are to bee described and delineated out the said notable land∣markes, as Townes, Castles, Promontories, and such like. Betwixt these places if any man desire to know the distance in miles, hee may know it by finding out any one of these Distan∣ces; for one being knowne, the rest will also bee exactly knowne▪ as for example, wee will imagine the Distance AD to containe 10 miles: wherefore let the line AD bee diuided into 10 equall parts: then with your compasse examine how many such parts are contained in the Distance AF, for so ma∣ny miles will bee likewise in it contained: as for example ac∣cording to this supposition wee shall find it 5 parts: wherefore the castle or city F will be 5 miles distant from the city A. Hee that desires more particularly to acquaint himselfe with the vse and diuerse manners of descriptions of Regions, deriued from this one ground; Let him haue recourse to diuerse Authors who haue particularly laboured in this subiect; amongst which our two Englishmen, Digges, and Hopton, deserue not the least praise: whereof the later, out of these principles hath framed a curious instrument, which hee calls his Topographicall-Glasse, whose vse hee hath perspicuously and exactly taught in diuerse pleasant conclusions, too large for the scope of my methode to insert. 2 At one Station by opticall obseruation, the situa∣tion of one place in respect of the other may bee found out. This may bee shewed out of an opticall experiment, both pleasant and admirable: The ground is expressed in this propo∣sition: The light traiected by a narrow hole into a darke place, will represent in any Table or white paper within, whatsoeuer is with∣out directly opposed vnto it: For demonstration of which pro∣position, wee must take as granted of the perspecti e Authours, That the visuall Image or species will passe by a right line through any little hole, and will bee terminated in any point of the Medium: Now that it should more perspicuously bee seene in a darke place, then in the light. The cause is assigned to bee, because the light of the Sunne is taken away, or much dimini∣shed, which otherwise would hide and shadow the species of the thing which is presented to the sight; as wee see by experi∣ence the greater light of the Sun to obscure the Starres: which neuerthelesse from the darke bottome of a deepe Well or Mine, will shew themselues at mid-day. Neuerthelesse wee must ob∣serue by the way, that this representation of any thing to the sight by this Image impressed in this sort in a wall or paper, will shew it selfe so, as the parts will bee seene inuersed, or (as wee may say) turned on the contrary side: as the higher, lower, the lower, higher ; the right-side, to the left ; and the left, to the right: which we may declare by an ocular demonstration in this figure heere inserted: Let vs imagine a Triangular platforme of land, where∣of we desire to know the situation, to bee ABC: from the ex∣treame An∣gles of this Triangle, we will suppose certaine Rayes to bee drawne through the hole D into a darke place, wherein shall bee opposed to the hole D, a white Table or paper, which shall be NM: Here will a Ray from the point designing out the Angle at A, bee carried through the hole, that it will point out in the Table K (because all such beames according to the Opticks are right lines.) Like∣wise the Angle B will in the Table designe out the Point I: also C will fall into the point H: Let KH, IK, HI, be ioyned to∣gether by right lines, there will appeare the Triangle IKH: wherein the top of the Triangle A will bee seene in the lowest place K: Likewise the Angles of the Basis B and C, will ap∣peare in the points of the highest place HI: and the right side A C, will shew it selfe in the left HK: as the left side will be the right in IH: wherefore the side of the whole Triangle ABC will shew it selfe in the Table NM, although inuersely placed according to the sides and Angles: and of a various greatnesse in respect of the distance of the Table from the hole. The inuen∣tion hath great vse in Astronomy, in obseruing Eclipses, the be∣ginning, and continuance, without any hurt at all to the sight. No lesse vse may it challenge in Topography in describing of Territories, Citties, Borrowes, Castles, and such like, in their due symmetry and proportion: To practise which the better, Reusner would haue a little house built of light Timber, with a Muliangle Basis : in euery one of whose sides, a hole should be made, looking inwardly, at the vertex, or top, but outward∣ly at the Basis: through which the species or Image of all such things a are visible may haue free passage. 2 The manner of translation of a Region into the chart, depends from the knowledge of the Longitude and Latitude. 3 The parts to bee described, whereof the chart consists, are either Essentiall, or Acci∣dentall: The Essentiall, are either the Lines, as are the Meridians and Parallels : or the Places to bee delineated out by Pictures; The declination of both which, shall be taught in these rules. 1 To set downe the Meridians and Parallels in a particular chart. To shew the practise hereof, wee will take for instance the Region of France, an example familiar with our later Topo∣graphers, and therefore can better warrant the description: France is supposed to haue in latitude 10. degrees, in longitude 16: This knowne, you must proceede in this manner: First through the middle of your table from head to foote, let there bee drawne a perpendicular line expressing the Meridian of the world, which shall bee marked with the letters EF: let this line bee diuided into 10. equall parts: then draw two Pa∣rallell lines, whereof the one must crosse the said line about the point E with right Angles: and the other Parallell must crosse it againe beneath in the point F with like Angles: let the vppermost Parallell bee expressed by AB: The neathermost with CD: Then with your compasse take one of the 10 parts of the line EF, which is one degree, and set that downe apart by it selfe, diuiding the same into 60 Minutes, as the short line GH, in the table here inserted will shew on the right hand. Now you may learne by some Table or Mappe, that the farthest part of France toward the North, through which is drawne the Parallell AB is 52. degrees distant from the Equatour: And that the South Parallell CD, is distant 42 degrees: Also certaine Tables in our former booke will informe you, that to euery degree of the Parallell 42. delineated by AB, doe answer 37 miles: and that to eue∣ry degree of the Parallell CD, answer 45 miles: wherefore with your compasse take from the short line GH, 37 partes or Minutes, and with your compasse kept at the same large∣nesse, let the Parallell AB bee diuided into 16 equall spaces correspondent to that widenesse (that is to say) on each side of the Meridian 8 parts: at which Meridian EF, you must be∣gine your measure towards either hand both right and left, marking the end of euery such space with a certaine point▪ Moreouer for the South Parallell CD. let 45 parts likewise bee taken from the short line GH, and let that Parallell bee di∣uided into 16 spaces, correspondent to that widenesse of the compasse, eight spaces being set downe on each side of the Meridian EF: So that wee must beginne from the Meridian EF, and marke the end of euery such space with a point. Then from those points wherewith each of those two Parallells AB, and CD is marked; Let there bee drawne a right line from point to point, and those shall serue for Meridians ▪ expres∣sing as well the longitude of the whole Region, as of euery particular place therein seated. In like sort as you haue diui∣ded the Meridian EF, into 10 equall parts, so againe into the like number of equall parts must bee diuided each of the two vttermost Meridians, on the left hand and the right, mar∣king with a point the end of euery such space, and so from point to point let there bee drawne right lines, cutting all the Meridians, and those shall serue for Parallells, and in the vtter∣most spaces, let there bee written the numbers of Longîtude and Latitude. The Longitude, is supposed to beginne at the vttermost Meridian at the left hand, which in both Parallells is the farthest Meridian Westward. Now for as much as the most Westerly Meridian is foureteene degrees distant from the Meridian passing by the Canary Ilands, from which as the first Meridian, the auncients beganne their accompts: you must set downe in the first place on the left hand, as well ouer, as vn∣der in the first space 15, in the second 16, in the third, 17, and so orderly proceed through all the spaces, till you come to 30: For the difference betwixt 14 and 30, is 16: So you haue the whole Longitude of France expressed in your Table, which is 16 degrees: In the like sort to expresse the Latitude (ha∣uing the degrees of Latitude marked out) you must beginne at each end of the South Parallell CD, and so proceed vp∣ward in the two vttermost Meridians, writing downe in the first space at the foot of the Table 43 degrees, on the right hand and the left, in the second space 44, in the third 45, and so vpwards along to 52, so haue you expressed the whole La∣titude of France from North to South: for betwixt 42 and 52 are comprehended iust 10 degrees: These degrees may againe be diuided at pleasure into lesser parts, as minutes, according to the largenesse of your chart. 2 To set downe Citties, Castles, Mountaines, Riuers, and such like speciall places in the chart. The platforme of your chart being once drawne out, as wee haue formerly taught in the precedent rule, you may very easily set downe speciall places by obseruation of the Longitudes or Latitudes of such places, either by instruments or Tables, and reducing them accordingly to your chart: which wee suppose before, marked out according to seuerall degrees: As for exam∣ple, if wee would set downe in our chart the Metropolis of France, which is Paris: hauing recourse to my Table, I finde it to haue in Longitude 23 degrees, in Latitude 48 degrees. Here to finde out the said longitude you must extend a threed from the 23 degrees of the Parallell AB to the like de∣gree in the Parallell CD: then holding it fast, you must crosse that threed with another extended from the Meridian AC, to the Meridian AD in the points of 28 degrees: The point wher∣in these two threeds shall cut and crosse one the other, you may take for the true place of Paris, and marke it out in your chart: In like sort you may proceede with all other places. But if you were to describe a riuer in your chart, it will not bee sufficient to take the Longitude and Latitude of the beginning or foun∣taine, but of the end, middle, turnings, and angles, Townes, or Cities, by which it passeth, Bridges and other occurrent cir∣cumstances: In like sort may you set downe Woods, Forrests, Mountaines, Lakes, and other places whatsoeuer. 4 Thus much for the Essentiall part of the particular Chart: The Accidentall part wee call the Scales of Miles, which teacheth how many miles are contained betwixt any two places in the Chart, wherein we are to know two things, 1 The Fabricke ; 2 The Vse. 1 The Fabricke of the Scale depe ds from the certaine knowledge of the Distance of any two places in the Chart. The practise is very easie, and taught in these three Rules: 1 You must search out the distance betwixt any two places whatsoeuer, which are contained in the Region, described in your Chart: which you may doe either experimentally by your owne knowledge, or some certaine relation of Trauailers. 2 Then must you draw three Parallell lines, containing two spaces, one larger, the other lesser, in some voide space of your Chart. 3 You must diuide the said Scale into so many Miles, as the said voide space will giue you leaue, according to the known distance first found out: As for example, the distance betwixt Paris and Roane is knowne to be 30 French leagues, which con∣taines 60 of our Miles, allowing for euery such league, 2 Miles. Wherefore your Parallell lines being first drawne (as you see in the former Chart) diuide your Scale into 30 parts accordingly, and in the larger space, place your Numbers, as 10.20.30. and so forth, so farre as your space will conueniently ex∣tend. 2 The Distance of any two places set downe in the Chart, being taken and applyed to the scale, will shew how many miles it containes As for example, I would willingly know how many English Miles are contained betwixt Paris and Orleans in my Chart of France : Here I take with my compasse the distance betwixt the said Cities in the Chart, and applying that to the Scale, I find it to containe 50 miles: which is the true measure. CHAP. V. Of Hydrography. 1 H Itherto haue we treated of the Ge∣nerall Adiuncts and Proprieties of places in the Terrestriall Spheare: we are in the next place to handle the Distinction. 2 A place is generally distinguished into Water and Land: The Description of the former is termed Hydrographie ; The other for distincti∣on we call Pedography. 3 Hydrographie is a Description of the Water, with the Accidents thereunto belonging. The Water wee consider not here meerely Physically, as it is an Element, whereof mixt bodies are compounded; but To∣pographically, as it beares a part in the Terrestriall Globe: yet are wee not so curious to exclude such Physicall problemes and considerations as are most subiect to sense; which a Topogra∣pher cannot well neglect: being the markes and characters, de∣signing out speciall places: To finde out the originall of the Water, wee must first take as granted, that Almighty God (as wee reade in the first of Genesis ) in the beginning made a sepa∣ration betwixt the waters aboue the Firmament, and the wa∣ters vnder the Firmament; whereof the former is termed in the Scriptures , which is as much to say as expansum, a thing stretched out, or extended. By these waters aboue the Firmament, whether wee ought to vnderstand the cloudie va∣pours in the middle Region of the Aire: or the pure fluid and liquid body, whereof the Firmament consists; I leaue it to learned diuines and criticke expositours to dispute: although the propriety of the phrase (if it bee well rendred) will seeme to fauour this opinion rather then the other: for as much as the Aire can no way bee said to bee aboue the Firmament, except the Hebrew terme miscarry in the Translation. For the solidi∣ty of the Celestiall Orbs, which Aristotle labours to con∣firme, is found long since to thwart the obseruations of Astro∣nomers : although it may thus bee retained as vsefull suppositi∣ons to settle Imagination. But to let this passe, and come to the waters vnder the Firmament, vnderstood by the word , which signifies as much as a collection of waters: wee shall find them to haue taken their originall from the se∣paration of the waters substance from the Dry-land, caused by God in the first Creation, testified by Moses in 1 Gen: which once granted (as no Christian can deny) easily rebates the edge of the opinion of some auncient Philosophers, who conten∣ded, out of the nature of Drouth and Moisture, to deriue the beginning of this separation. The drynesse of the Earth (say they) working by little and little, diminisheth, or at least resisteth the waters, so that they should not altogether ouer∣whelme the Land: But this reason is altogether deficient in Nature: Because Drouth and Moisture are no such qualities to haue such an operation: and if any such there were betwixt Drouth and Moisture, the Drouth (as wee see by experience) would rather draw moisture vnto it, then any way expell it, or driue it away: whence it is most euident, that it was effected by no other meanes then the immediate worke and proui∣dence of God, for the preseruation of liuing creatures: for, be∣fore God said; Let the waters bee gathered into one place : the Water was said to couer the whole face of the Earth; but af∣terwards at Gods appointment, the water went backe, and shewed the dry-land. But by what meanes God separated the one from the other, it is much controuersed amongst Diuines and Philosophers. Many were of opinion, that the Earth was suffered to stand intire without alteration, and that the waters were eleuated aboue it; so that if they were suffered to flow a∣broad, they might againe couer the face of the Earth, as in the beginning. But why the Waters should bee thus restrained, is not agreed among them: for some thought, that this was done by the miraculous power of God, which restraines the flowing abroad of the Water, beyond ordinary bounds; of which opinion is S t Ierome, who grounded his opinion (as it seemes) on the authority of the Scripture, especially in the 8 of the Pro∣uerbs, and the 103 Psalme ; where God is said to haue set a bound vpon the seas, which they should not passe: But this reason seemes not warrantable; That the great Creator of all things, should in the first institution of Nature impose a perpetuall violence vpon Nature. Moreouer all miracles are temporary, and not perpetuall; for then were it or∣dinary, and so scarce a miracle: others vpon lesse ground, haue imagined that there are certaine Northerne starres in Vrsa maior and Draco, of so great vertue, that they can draw the Ocean from this habitable part of the earth to∣ward the North, and so constraine the waters, that they can∣not ouerwhelme the earth: but this opinion is ridiculous, and deserues no solide refutation: being a meere coniecture, with∣out ground or probability: others vpon the like reason, haue dreamed that there is more Water then Earth in the Globe; and that the water by his extraordinary masse occupying the cen∣ter of the world, turnes the earth on one side, making it to swimme as a ship vpon the sea: But this assertion wee haue refuted in our first Chapter of the first booke: All these Au∣thors suppose that the earth is vncouered toward the North-Pole; but ouerflowne with waters towards the South: which the experience of Nauigatours at this day hath sufficiently disanulled: Others againe affirming out of a Peripateticall dreame that the water is ten times greater then the earth, suppose the earth to bee like a sponge to drinke vp the water: to proue which assertion they produce an experiment, that the earth being digged any thing deepe in most places, there will appeare water: whence they collect that the water is mixt with the whole earth, and receiued into it' concauities: But howsoeuer wee may graunt, that there are many and vast con∣cauities in the Earth, capable of Waters; yet it is impossible, that the Water should bee ten times as great as the Earth: for by this reason, although all the Terrestriall Globe were Wa∣ter, it could not bee, but that a greater portion of Water, then that in the Earth, should arise aboue the Earth: because, ac∣cording to their owne Supposition, 9 partes should bee aboue the Earth: Neither can Aristotles words bee well wrested to this interpretation: For as much as hee vnderstood this ten-fold proportion of the Water to the Earth; not of the spaces, which they replenished, measured by their Circles and Diameters: but of the proportion they beare one to the other in their trans∣mutation: as that one measure of Earth turned into Water, should bee as much as 10. All these opinions seeming so absurd, it seemeth more probable to imagine, that either the Waters are condensated, and thickned, which were in the be∣ginning created thinne: whence will follow, that they should occupy a lesse place, and by consequence, leaue the dry-land in many places habitable: or, which is more probable; that God in the first Creation made certaine hollow concauities and channels in the Earth, which was before plaine and vniforme; into which the waters were receiued and bounded, in so much, that they could not flow abroad. This seemes enough to satisfy the search of such as are not too curious to search into his secrets, whose power and omnipotence transcends the capacity of the wisest: In this diuision of a place into Water, and Land, wee will first treat of the Sea, and the accidents belonging thereunto: Not that the water is worthier or greater then the Earth▪ The contrary whereof wee haue proued heretofore: but because the consideration of it, is more simple, as that wherein fewer mat∣ters are to bee handled then in the land. For Riuers and Lakes, although consisting of this watery element, wee thought fit to handle apart: as adiuncts belonging to the land. 4 In the Sea are considered two things: 1 The Adiuncts, 2 The Diuision. The Accidents of the sea whereof we are to treat, are either In∣ternall, or E ternall. 5 The Internall, are such as are inb ed in the Sea: These againe are either Absolute or Rela∣tiue. 6 The Absolute, are such as agree to the Sea, without any comparison with the land: such are either, Figure, Quality, or Motion. 7 The figure is the conformity of the externall superficies of the Sea; whereof obserue this Theorem . 1 Although the whole body of the water be Spheri∣call, yet it is probable that the parts of it, incline to a Conicall figure. That the whole Water according to it's outward superficies, i Sphericall and round, is sufficiently demonstrated before, in the first booke. But notwithstanding this roundnesse of the whole, the parts of it may (for ought I see) admit of a Conicall figure; for as much as this hath little or no proportion to the vast Spheracity of the Water, no more then little hils, to the greatnesse of the Earth. For the prosecution of which point, I will first shew the reason of this my coniecture, grounded on experience; and afterwards out of the ground and de∣monstration of the principles of Mathematicall Philosophie, endeauour to make it more manifest. First therefore by a Coni∣call line, wee vnderstand a crooked line which differs from a Periphery or circle, in as much as it keeps not alwayes an e∣quall distance, from the center: but is higher in the midst, then on either side: Now if the parts of the water standing still, were in their higher superficies exactly sphericall; they should by the same grounds bee concentricall, or haue the same center with the whole Earth: But that it hath not the same center, will appeare by little dropps of Water falling on the ground, which incline (as wee see) to a round figure; yet were it more then ridiculous to say, that this round conuexity of a droppe could bee concentricall with the whole Earth: sith in so great a masse, it is hardly sensible. But here our ordinary Philoso∣phers are ready to answer, that this conformity of the water dropps in a round figure, is rather Violent, then Naturall: be∣cause the Water being by nature moist, is ready to fly, and a∣uoid the touch or drouth, or any dry thing. And because the Water thus auoiding the drouth, cannot of necessity but some way touch it, it is imagined to conforme it selfe to that figure, whereit it may least of all touch: This is the round or Sphericall figure; wherein any body contained, cannot touch a plaine, otherwise then in one onely point. But against this con∣iecture of moisture flying drouth, strong enough is the experi∣ment of Scaliger, in his 105 exercitation: that quick-siluer a moist substance, being cast either into Water or Iron-Oare, will gather it selfe to a round body, notwithstanding it is manifest, that quick-siluer naturally neither auoides the touch of Wa∣ter or Iron, for as much as the one is very m st, the other of great affinity, (as our Chimicks teach) with quick-siluer ▪ the parent of all Mettals. Moreouer it is manifest, that this con∣formity to roundnesse, is in dropps of raine falling to the Earth, through the Aire : yet will not our Peripateticks admit of any drouth in the Aire, which this moist element should seeke to auoid. Moreouer if Water should conforme it selfe to roundnesse, by reason of the drouth of the body, whereon it fall, then must it follow; that either the moisture of the Wa∣ter should xpell the drouth of the Earth ; or else that the drouth of the Earth should worke on the moisture of the Water ▪ But neither can be graunted with probability. First be ause moisture and drouth are not qualities of such actiuity to driue and rem ue, one the other from one place to another, as it is here imagined: Secondly; if the moist should worke on the dry, it should either touch it or not: If it touches not, it can∣not worke on it: becau e no Physicall action can bee performed with t touching: besides, it were very impossible, to imagine that without thi t uch, one of these qualities should perceiue or ent the other to auoid it. If it touch, it auoides not the touch, but ioynes it selfe with the drouth: And indeed reason and experience shewes, that dro th rather couets and drawes vnto it selfe moisture, then expels it: wherefore Scaliger goes about to o ge a new cause of this experience. Euery thing (saith hee) in this nature is one, and the selfe-same: But this vnity in Homogeneall bodies, is best preserued in a Globe or round figure: wherein is no inequality, no parts higher or lower, abounding or deficient. But her might a man aske why the greater parts of the Water are not likewise con∣formed vnto roundnesse, as well as the lesser droppe; Hee would perhaps answer, that nature in them was not in such di∣st sse, to make vse of this speciall priuiledge; I grant it: yet find I in this no satisfaction; for as much as hee giues a fi∣ all cause, where I sought an efficient▪ for I would farther aske by what action or motion this water should gather it selfe in∣to a circular figure, and from what forme it should arise: for first wee haue shewed, that this motion cannot proceed from the externall drouth, wee must seeke the cause in the water it selfe: here wee shall finde it, either the particular forme of the water, or a certaine vniuersall forme, as some suppose it cannot bee imagined, that it should proceed from the generall forme of the vniuerse: First, because as wee haue elsewhere proued, there is no such Internall forme of the world: Secondly, those motions are commonly ascribed to an vniuersall Nature or forme, wherein any particular body (as it were) neglects his owne Nature, for the preseruation of the whole Vniuerse. But here water containing it selfe in an orbe, and not lowing a∣broad towards the Center, rather seemes to forsake the Cen∣ter and Vniuerse to preserue it selfe. Whence we must ne∣cessarily conclude, that this roundnesse in drops of water cast on the sand, proceedes not from externall drouth, nor any vni∣ ers ll forme, but from the peciall and essentiall forme of the water; and consequently, because it makes a circle excen∣tricall with the Earth, it must bee found rising higher in the midst: To which wee will adde another experiment: Let there bee cast on a large Table or planke, a little portion or drop of water: I here aske, whither this water on the midst of the Ta∣ble equilibrated, will continually flow abroad, or at length suffer a stay or stop? It cannot bee continually spread abroad: first, because experience teacheth the contrary; for we see little drops cast on such a plaine, to confine themselues within cer∣taine bounds: and least any should imagine (as before) that this happens by reason of the drouth of the Table, let him first moisten the Table, and hee shall find no great alteration: Se∣condly, if the water should alwayes fall downward, and so still runne abroad, and spread it selfe to the margents of the Table, it would follow, that if the Table were of an infinite capacity, the water thus shed, would infinitely flow abroad, without intermission; and so should Nature set no bound to the thick∣nesse and motion of the water: whereof experience hath suffici∣ently taught the contrary. Now, that water thus standing still on a plaine equilibrated Table, should haue a Canonicall figure, it may bee plainely proued almost by sense, whereby wee per∣ceiue the middle to bee higher then the extreames: for no man can deny but the water thus standing, is endowed with thicknesse, for as much as it is a naturall body. Wherefore of ne∣cessity it must swell aboue the Table. It cannot bee Spherically Concentricall with the whole Earth, because in so small a seg∣ment of an Arch, as this little quantity of water admits, it would bee insensible. It cannot bee plaine, because the sides or extremities of it touch the Table, whereas the middle superfi∣ ies, by reason of the thicknesse, is eleuated aboue the Table. Neither can wee imagine another figure besides, which can aptly bee admitted. It is meet in the next place, that out of the grounds of Philosophie, wee explaine how it comes to partici∣pate this figure: where wee are first to vnderstand, that the fi∣gure of the water is (as it were) compounded of two spheares; whereof the first is imagined to bee concentricall with the whole Earth; the other lesser onely answering to the portion or quantity of water, were it made round; for if wee consider the simple and particular nature of the water, wee shall find it inclining to roundnesse of it selfe, as wee haue shewed by expe∣riment▪ yet such a sensible roundnesse, as cannot haue one Cen∣ter with the Earth. But if we consider the water as it concurres to the constitution of the whole Vniuerse, wee shall find this Figure to partake of a circular segment concentricke with the whole Earth. Now because neither of these two Figures can precisely and exactly arise by it selfe, sith the one must needs some what alter the other, wee must of necessity admit of a figure mixt and compounded of both these; which can bee no other then a Cone. To expresse this more plainely (because this path is yet vntroden) wee find in the water a double motion directed to this double figuration. The first whereof is that, whereby all the parts of a quantity of water, are inclined to an Absolute roundnesse, or Sphericall Figure, without respect of the Vniuerse: the Center of which roundnesse, is to bee sought in the water it selfe. The later is that, whereby the parts of the Water conforming themselues to the Center of the Earth, as neere as they can, make a Sphericall figure (as much as Nature can suffer) concentricke with the whole Ter∣restriall Globe. In the former of these motions, the Water seekes it's owne preseruation; in the later, the safety of the whole Vniuerse: for the safety and consistency of the whole, is deriued from the part, which concurre to preserue the whole. To expresse a little better the manner of these two concurrent operations; wee will take for an vndoubted ground, That God hath giuen to Nature a power and inclination to preserue herselfe. This granted, wee must distinguish of a two-fold preserua∣tion: the one Speciall, wherein euery Body seekes it's owne safety: the other Generall, wherein all Bodies concurre to the preseruation of the whole: The former proceeds from the speciall Forme and Nature of euery Body; which is perfor∣med by the vnion of all his parts to it selfe; this vnion is grea∣test of all in a Sphericall figure; wherein all the extreme parts are equally distant from the Center, admitting no Equality of dimension. The Generall depends from the Resultancy and Harmony of all the parts, whereby is caused an vnion of all the parts with the whole; to whose preseruation they are seconda∣rily directed: whence ariseth a double figurature of the water; the one of a Spheare, excentricall with the Earth: the other al∣so of a Spheare, but concentricke with the Earth; whereof this Conicall figure is compounded. Why this figure should be more sensible in a small drop or quantity, then in the Ocean, may bee declared from the same ground well vnderstood; because the conuexity of the lesser Spheare excentricke with the Earth, is more; and the greater, is lesse: for by how much the lesser is the Spheare, the greater will be the conuexity: and by how much greater the Spheare, the lesser will the bee conuexity, or croo∣kednesse. Wherefore this crookednesse being in a small measure of water very sensible, in a maine Ocean will by sense be hardly distinguished from a right line. 8 Of the Figure of the Water wee haue spo∣ken: Wee must now speake of the Quality, which is two-fold: Saltnesse, and Thick∣nesse. 1 The Water of the Sea is salt, not by Nature, but by Accident. That the Sea is of a saltish Quality, no man hath euer doub∣ted, at least in most parts: But whether this saltish Quality, essentially agrees to the center of the Sea, as therein created, or else Accidentally brought in, I finde no small difference a∣mong Philosophers. Those which defend the saltishnesse to bee Accidentall, are diuided into diuers sorts: for some of the old Philosophers imagined, that the Earth chased and Heat with the Sunne, continually sweats out water: whence is made the Sea, and therefore should haue a saltish taste, because all sweat is of this Quality: But this opinion I take to bee no other then a pleasant Allegory of the old Greeke writers, who wrote their Philosophy in verse, and therefore vsed such allusions, as wee shall perhaps find in many other matters, poëtically deuised of them; yet refuted of Aristotle in good earnest: others haue more probably coniectur'd, that this saltishnesse was first deri∣ued from the Earth, through whose parts the Water being strained, is apt to receiue this Quality, being primarily in the Earth it selfe: as wee see water being wrung through ashes, to grow salt: but this opinion seemeth of no great soundnesse; because the first Riuers and Lakes being drawne out of the Earth altogether, and in regard of their small quantity, more apt to yeeld and receiue this tincture, are notwithstanding de∣uoide of all such Quality. Besides this, wee rather find the con∣trary by experiment: That Sea-Water strained through clay, will turne fresh: as likewise powdred flesh being layed to soake n salt water, will soone turne sweet: The former is ve∣rified by Baptista Porta: of the other, euery kitchin-maide on the Sea-side will informe vs. The third opinion is of Aristotle, who referres the saltish quality of the Sea-water to the Sunne, as the chiefe cause, drawing and lifting vp out of the Sea store of exhalations, which afterwards mixt with vapours, fall downe againe by drops: for the Sunne drawes vp the thinner and fresher parts of the water, leauing the thicker and lower water to suffer adustion of the Sunne-beames, and so conse∣quently to become salt: so that the matter of this saltishnesse in the Sea, is by an exhalation: the Sunne drawing vp to the middle Region of the Aire, the fresher parts; where thickned, they descend in raine, leauing the residue of the Sea salt. The forme is the straining and concoction, which is made by the Sun; for the saltishnes is said to arise out of the commixtion of Terre∣striall drynesse, concurring with moisture, ioin'd with adusti∣on of Heat: so that two things are chiefly concurring to the Generation of saltishnesse; to wit, Drouth and Adustion. This seemes to bee prooued by instance of Fresh-waters in the kit∣chin, which turne salt, being much boyled, because the thinner and sweeter vapours of it are drawne vp, and dissipated, leauing that behind which is thicker and saltish. The same would some haue in the Sea, seethed (as it were) and burnt with the Heate, which we experimentally find in hot water on the fire. But this is excepted against by some, because wee find by experience, that many salt wells and fountaines arise in diuers places of the Earth, which are ingendred in the bowels of the Earth farre remote and separate from this extreame heate and a∣dustion of the Sunne-beames: But to this wee may easily an∣swer, that such salt springs are either by some violence en∣forced from the sea by certaine secret cauernes, and hollow places of the Earth: or else that they receiue their tincture of saltnesse from some salt minerals of the Earth, through which they passe. Wherefore this opinion of Aristotle I see not yet sufficiently refuted. The other opinion concerning this quality of such, which would haue it essentiall to the sea wa∣ter, and inbred in the first creation, is grounded on two small causes: First they say that the sea is salt, for the preseruation of the Fishes, who would otherwise rot, because experi∣ence shewes, that Fish will soone putrifie without salt; but this is thwarted by three reasons: First, because if fish were in this sort salted in the sea Water, the cooke might saue him∣selfe a labour in salting them againe in his kitchin: Also Fishes caught in the sea, are oftentimes preserued longer and swee∣ter, lesse needing salt then those which are found in fresh Ponds and Riuers: Secondly, if this reason should hold cur∣rant, why should not the Fishes also rot and put ify in fresh Water? Thirdly, why should fishes couet the fresh Water (as wee see by experience in many fishes) if in it they should suffer putrefaction, which is a great enemy to nature; Aboue all what need wee feare this putrefaction of fishes, while they are endowed with a liuing soule, which is a greater preser∣uatiue then all the salt in the world; or why should wee not doubt the same calamity in all liuing creatures in the land, which are as subiect to rottenesse in the Aire, as the other on the land? The second cause (say they) Why the sea should bee created salt, is; Because the sea it selfe should not putrify, for as much as wee find by experience, that salt is the only thing to resist Putrefaction; But here wee may demaund; why these Authors should feare Putrefaction in the vast body of the sea, rather then in other Waters and Riuers, which are neither salt, nor come neere the greatnesse of the Ocean; whereas Aristotle affirmes in the fift chapter of the 4 booke of his Meteors, that if the Sea were d uided into many parts, it would more easily dissolue and putrify. The grounds of this o∣pinion being ouerthrowne, there want not reasons to contra∣dict: First (sayes one) if the Sea were not created salt, then was there some time wherein it was fresh: To this I answer two wayes: First, that it might bee created fresh, yet being apt from the heat of the Sunne to receiue saltnesse, it might, al∣most at the first receiue it. Secondly, if I should grant that it was a long time before it embraced this quality, I know neither History to confute mee, or reason to conuince mee. Se∣condly, it is vrged from the Nature of liuing creatures in the Sea, that they cannot well liue in fresh waters, and there∣fore it seemes originally salt, and not by Accident: But this is of no great force: First, because experience shewes, that many kind of fishes liue in both, and many rather couet and desire the fresh Water, then the Sea: Secondly, it is not improbable, that as the Sea by little and little and by degrees turned from freshnesse to saltnesse, the temper and disposition of the fishes, was in like manner changed and altered: Whence it may come to passe, that fishes since bred and nourished in fresh Waters, cannot so well endure the salt. Moreouer who knowes whe∣ther all these seuerall kinds of fishes now found in the Sea, were from the beginning, since wee see by experience, that sun∣dry kinds of liuing creatures dayly arise out of putrefaction on the land, which may with like probability, or more, bee ad∣mitted in the Sea. There are yet behind other reasons of one Patricius a Platonist, who would oppose Aristotle in good earnest. Aristotle (saith hee) speaking of the saltnesse of the Sea Water, shewed not the cause. For I would aske, why that parcell of water, from whence the thinner parts are extracted, should remaine salt: was it so from the beginning, or after∣wards imprest; was it Inbred, or Accidentall ? If hee would haue it an inbred quality from the beginning, hee vainly goes about to seeke out the cause; If the saltnesse bee aduentitious, the cause is to bee giuen; but the cause giuen by him, is not true, for as much as it rather takes away the saltnesse: But to these obiections of Patricius, spunne out in many words, wee may answer two wayes: either that the saltnesse is meerely ad∣uentitious bred by an exhalation, drawne vp by the Sunne, and so distilling downe againe; or else, because this answere seemes not wholely to satisfy. For as much as rainy Water is seldome salt, and if it were, could hardly flow in so great quantity to feed the saltnesse of the Sea: I will answer second∣ly, that the saltnesse is radically or originally in the matter of the Water; yet so, as it cannot bee drawne out and sensibly bee perceiued in the mixture of many sweet humours, ioyned with it, without a separation first made by the heat of the Sunne of the thinner parts from the thicker: So that the Sunne is a dis∣ponent, though not a productiue cause of this saltnesse in the Sea. 2 Seas absolutely salt, are neuer frozen. This may seeme a Paradoxe to some men, in regard that a∣mongst our Geographers, wee haue so often mention made of Mare Congelatum, taking it's name from the Ice wherewith it is shut vp from passage: as also for that in the voyages of Frobisher, Dauis, Hudson, and other later Nauigatours, which haue beene imployed in the search of the Northwest pas∣sage, wee find such strange relations, not onely of Seas closed vp with Ice, and hindring their passage towards the North; but also of Rocks and Ilands of Ice, of an incredible greatnesse. The truth of these Relations I no way disapproue, but rather out of these testimonies, approue our former assertion; that Seas which are wholly Salt, are neuer found to freeze: For first whereas it is called Mare Congelatum, it may beare the n me well enough from the multitude of Ice floating on the water, or collected into a Rocke or Iland. This Ice (as it will easily ap∣peare) is not produced out of the substance of the Salt water of the maine Ocean, but rather carryed into the Sea by great riuers of fresh water running into the Ocean: For the riuers are not alwayes frozen; but sometimes by a remission of the cold are thawed, and the peeces broken a sunder▪ and floating into the Sea, in it oft times meet in great heapes, which may bee proued: 1 In that these great r cks of Ice melting with the heate of the Sunne, haue dissolued into fountaines of fresh wa∣ter, gushing downe in great abundance, wherewith sometimes in case of necessity, they haue fraughted their shippes, as wee haue testified by the fore-named Nauigatours. 2 Because some part of the maine Sea, situate perhaps more Northerne, and in a colder Climate, suffers not this accident: whereas places neere the shore, farther South▪ are almost alwayes frozen: The reason whereof, is; because the Sea neere the shore is common∣ly mixed with fresh waters, conueyed in, either by great Ri∣uers, or infinite secret passages vnder ground, which wee see not: The reason why that salt waters exclude this propriety in∣cident or the fresh, I take to bee the Hot-spirits, hid in the salt humor, which are more feruent and operatiue, then those of the fresh water. 9 So much for the saltnesse: The next, is the Thicknesse : whereof we will set downe this short Theoreme. 1 The Water of the Sea is thicker then other Water. This Proposition hath it's light from the former: because thicknesse of Water is a companion of the saltnesse, as depen∣ding from the same cause, to wit, the exhalation, and extracti∣on of the thinner parts of the Water. There are many small causes giuen by Patricius of this thicknesse of the Sea-Water. F st, because the parts of it should more strongly hold toge∣ther, and not couer and ouerflow the firme land: But this seemes to bee grounded on an errour, that the Water should be aboue the Land; and that it should containe it selfe within it's owne bounds and limits, which opinion we haue elsewhere reiected. The second cause of the thicknesse of the Sea, is; that it might bee more apt to beare and carry ships, and other great weights for the vse of man. Thirdly, the Water being thicke, may more easily bee conuerted into salt, out of which, many saltish minerals in the Earth are ingendred. Other causes are giuen by this Author, but lesse forceable, which we will omit, as referring them to the Philosopher, whose proper taske it is to seek them out. CHAP. VI. Of the Motions of the Sea. 1 T He Motion of the Sea, whereof we are in this Chapter to treate, is either Naturall, or Violent. The Naturall I call that, which is partly incident to the Na∣turall Disposition of the Sea. 2 This againe is two-fold, either Generall, or Speciall : Generall is that which agrees gene∣rally to all, or at least to most parts of the Sea: such as is the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea. Wee must here obserue, that the Water hath a two-fold Motion; The first is common to all heauy Bodyes, as well as the Earth, in which is an inclination to come as neere as they can to the Center of the Earth, whereof wee haue spoken in our former booke: The second is that which more properly agrees to the Sea, which is againe twofold: either the Natu∣rall, or the Violent. The Naturall, howsoeuer requi ing per∣haps the concurrence of some externall cause, is notwithstan∣ding so called; for as much as it chiefly seemes to proceede from the Disposition of the Sea-water; The Violent is caused meerely by the violence of the winds mouing the Ocean. The Naturall motion we haue againe diuided into generall, or spe∣ciall; because the Affluxe, and Refluxe of the Sea, whereof we are to treat, is generall throughout the whole Ocean, (some petty creekes perchance excepted) whereas the Currents, (which is the second kinde of motion) are more speciall, as a∣greeing not to all, or most parts (as it seemes) but to some one or other speciall place, as we shall shew. 1 The Sea twice euery day ebbes and flowes. The flowing and ebbing of the Sea, howsoeuer it cannot be precisely obserued in all Seas; yet because few places of the maine Ocean are exempted from it, deserues the first & chief∣est consideration. That such a motion there is, experience shewes; but the searching out of the cause, is, for ought I can obserue, one of the greatest difficulties in all Naturall Philo∣sophie ▪ in so much as Aristotle one of the acutest Philosophers, is reported to haue stood amazed at the flowing and ebbing of Euripus, and despairing of finding out the cause, at length en∣forced to cast himselfe into the Riuer which had before con∣founded him. Wherefore it may seeme sufficient for mee to trace their steps, who haue waded far into the search of this cause, hauing very little hope to goe further. The first opinion was of the Stoickes, who supposed the whole World to bee a great liuing creature, composed of diuerse Elements, which inioyes both breath and life: This liuing creature they ima∣gine to haue his nostrils placed in the maine Ocean, where by drawing in, and sending foorth breath, the ebbing and flowing of the Sea is caused: but this seemeth rather to bee a Poeticall fiction, or Allegory then any conceit of a Philosopher. Apollo∣nius Tianaeus was of an opinion, that certaine Spirits eithervn∣der, or aboue the Water, breathed into it this motion. Timaeus taught the cause of this moisture to be the riuer, breaking in∣to the Ocean by the great mountaines; Plato thought that it was made by the swallowing vp of the Sea into a gulfe or hole which being againe cast out, was the cause of that mo∣tion in the Sea. Seleuous the Mathematician, which affirmed that the Earth was carried round with a perpetuall motion, thought that the Moone was turned round with a motion contrary to the motion of the E rth, and from this to proceed that motion of ebbing and flowing of the Sea, whereof wee now treat. What Aristotles opinion was concerning this mat∣ter, is an vncertaine coniecture; forasmuch as litle or nothing can bee gathered touching this point in controuersie out of a¦ny booke, which is certainly knowne to be Aristotles: for the tract of the propriety of Elements, where the cause of this mo∣tion is ascribed to the Moone, is iudged to be none of Ari∣stotles, but of some later Authour. Yet Plutarch imposeth on Aristotle this opinion; that this motion of the Sea should come from the Sun, because by it are raised vp many windy exhalations, which should cause the Sea to swell, blowing in∣to the great Atlantick Ocean. But thisopinion is charged by Pa ricius of a threefold errour: 1. That it should proceed from the Sun ; 2▪ From the wind; 3 That it is only in the Atlantick Sea. He saw (saith Patricius ) that in the Atlantick, which he could not in the Aegean Sea at home and neere Athens. For 1 No wind blowes so regularly, that for one six houres it should blow forward, the other six houres backward: for the wind oftentimes blowes many daies the same way without ceasing; yet is their not one only flowing or one ebbing in the Sea. 2. The Sunne stirres vp sometimes windes, and some∣times stirres them not vp. But of a perpetuall effect which is daily, why would this Philosopher giue a cause meerely vio∣lent, and not quotidian, which notwithstanding would haue nothing violent to be perpetuall? If the Sea bee somewhere moued naturally by other motions, as the Euripus, (which is said to be his death) wherefore will he deny this motion to be Naturall, seeking out an externall cause of this effect? But all this while our Platonick Philosopher seems to fight with sha∣dowes: for what iudicious man can imagine so iudicious and wise a Philosopher as Aristotle, should so grossely ouershoot himsel to father this opinion? I should much rather beleiue that no such opinion is to be found in Aristotle, at least that it is indirectly related: which I the rather beleiue, because one Caesalpinus a late Writer, aswell opposite to Aristotle, as the other hath related Aristotles opinion otherwise; to wit, that the ebbing and flowing of the Sea is deriued from a double cause: whereof the one is the multitude of Riuers bring∣ing in a great force of waters into it: whence it comes to passe that it flowes only towards one pa t, which is the lower, as it happens to the Mediterranean ; For the Egaean and Ponticke Sea, with Maeotis, flow into the Tyrrhene, and not on the op∣posite side: The other cause hee makes to bee the libration of the whole Sea: for it is often turn'd from one side to the other, which in so great a vastnes seemes but little; but in straights & narrow places much more. So that Aristotle (saith Caesalpi∣nus ) would haue that to agree to the Sea, which vsually hap∣pens to a paire of ballance: which hauing receiued the begin∣ning once of their motion, are inclined sometimes this way, & sometimes that way, by reason of the equality of the weight: for if the weight of one should ouercome, thewhole would incline thatway, and would not ri e vpon the other side. But against this opinion imposed on Aristotle, Caesalpinus not without good reason, excepts, that the Superficies of the Wa∣ter being Equidistant from the Center (as is supposed by Geographers ) no reason may bee giuen why it should incline more to one side then another, hauing once obtained his true place: sith according to Aristotles owne grounds, no violence c n be perpet all. To which I may adde another answer, that no satisfactory reason can be alleadged, why it should alwayes obserue so true and iust periods of time in its motion: sith all Riuers are sometimes encreased, and other times diminished according to the season of the yeere, and variety of the wea∣ther: wherefore the said Authour, which impugnes this opi∣nion, hath framed another conceit, grounded on the circular motion of the Earth, which he explaineth in this sort. It agrees o reason (saith he) that the Water should not altogether fol∣low the motion of the Earth, but should in part bee driuen backe, and in part flow besides: for since it is of a moist nature▪ while the Earth is carried from the Aire about it, the Water i somewhat left behind; as wee may see in a small vessell, which is mo e la ge then deep: for if it be moued forward, the Water will leape back to the opposite part, & will oftentimes poize it selfe hither & thither, seeking an aequilibration: when therefore the Earth is a litle caried forward, & the water (as it were) left behind, being out of his Aequilibrium, or aquall poize, it will runne to the other part, but beyond the true poize▪ forthe violence of the motion oppressed into it in the beginning, from thence, for the same cause, it will tend againe to the opposite part, doing this oftentimes, seeking an equall weight, wherein it may rest: so that if the Earth should at any times rest from her naturall motion, the Water would also leaue off the Libration to and fro. But because the circum∣volution of the Earth is imagined to be perpetuall, the libra∣tion of the sea is also per petuall: so farre forth then that this motion is of the continent or Earth, it is onely accidentall in the Water, neither besides his proper nature, neither accor∣ding to nature: But so farre forth as the Water is in some sort moued in the Earth, it may be said to be according to nature: for it alwaies seekes the lower place, because it cannot aequal∣ly follow the motion of the Earth. Hence they giue the rea∣son, why this motion is not perceiued in Lakes and Riuers, as well as in the maine Ocean: for sith the motion of the Earth is not very sensible, it cannot be perceiued but in a great masse of waters. The reasons to confirme this opinion, besides the refu∣tation of other opinions, are chiefly these two. If the Water by it selfe should be mou'd without the motion of the Earth, it must needs be moued either according to, or against his na∣ture. But neither of them can be graunted; First, if according to Nature, there would not be one only motion of one body according to nature, but many, which is denyed by Ar stotle ; If besides, or against Nature, some violent motion would bee perpetuall, which also seemes absurd: wherefore it must needs follow, that the sea should moue accidentally: For sith the Water is conteined outwardly of the Aire, internally of the Earth: And that part of the Aire which toucheth the Water is of Aristotle called Stagnans or standing still, not flowing, as that which is aboue the Earth, but is onely troubled vari∣ously with windes. This libration or motion of the Water cannot bee caused by the wind or Aire, wherefore it must proceed from the motion of the Earth. The second reason may be drawne from the quantity of tides in diuers places of the Earth, for it is ound by experience, that the Water swels higher & greater in the maine Ocean, then in other lesser Seas. For it is obserued, that about great Brittaine, it mounts sometimes aboue 80 cubits: also it oftner ebbes and flowes in lesser currents, because the spaces of this libration are shorter and stra ghter: or because besides the motion of ebbing and flowing, which the Mediterranean seas partake from the Ocean, at Hercules Pillars, they haue a proper libration in their owne channels: whence it comes to passe that▪ in some narrow seas, as in the Euripus, besides Euboia, the sea seauen times a day ebbs and flowes: whereof there can no sufficient reason be giuen from the motion of the Moone or other cause whereto other Philosophers ascribe this effect: This opini∣on of Caesalpinus seemes to carry great likelyhood of reason and congruity with experience: yet because it is grounded on the circular motion of the Earth, which seemes a paradox to most men, I dare not warrant it otherwise then probable▪ nei∣ther can it well stand with the grounds of our Magneticall Philosophers, because they affirme the whole spheare of the Earth and Water together with the Aire to moue round with one Vniforme revolution, in such sort as one should not moue to the opposite part, or stay behind the other; as they would haue it here to doe. There is yet another opinion more com∣monly defended in the schooles of naturall Philosopher ; that this motion of the sea is to bee ascribed to the Moone, as the principall cause: others againe, as they admit the Moone to haue her operation in this effect, ioyne other causes to it: and indeed this seemes more probable: for there want not argu∣ments in Patricius and other later writers, to shew that the Moone cannot be the sole cause of this motion: First, because this motion is not obserued in all seas, Lakes, and Riuers, whe eupon neuerthelesse the Moone hath the like dominion: But experience shewes the contrary: for besides fresh Riuers it is manifest by obseruation of trauailers, that this ebbing and flowing is not to be found in the Hirc , Mantian and Dead sea, also in Maotis Palus in the Pontick: Proponti ke, Ligurian and Narbon streytes, neither in the Tyrrhene sea: Moreouer it is not obserued in a great part of the Red sea: Neither can the Narrownesse of the channell excuse it, because these seas are great, and also for the most part within the Tropicke of Can∣cer, and therefore exposed sometimes to the perpendicular beames of the Moone. Secondly: If the Moone should by her owne orce excite and moue these water , then would it moue those seas, which it doth moue, Altogether and not only in parts. The contrary whereof we may find: First in the Red Sea, which in the beginning and end, Ebbes and flowes, but in the middle not at all▪ moreouer the Mediterranean sea ebbes & flowes as one sea, on all the coasts of Africa, wherein it is in a sort diuided▪ and yet those seas, with which it is ioyned, as the Tyrrhene, Ligurian, and Gallican Seas, feele not any such motion. Thirdly; it is obiected, that if the Moone were the only cause of this Fl x and Reflux of the sea, then those seas, which are said in whole to moue, should aequally flow in hight: but this is contradicted by experience: because some flow higher, and some lower, As for example: The Adriatick sea in the inmost creeke neere Venice swels neere foure foote in hight; but the rest of it, not aboue two oote: which increase is likewise obserued in the Aegean, Cretian, Ionian, and Cy∣prian Seas, also the Syrian and Aegyptian, euen to Portus Ferinae: But from mons pulcher to the Herculean streytes, it increaseth aboue two foot in length: But without these straights, the same Ocean by the coasts of Portugall and Bis∣cay, and France, the Sea riseth vsually to 15 foot in hight; and neere the coasts of Belgia and Brittaine 18 foot: At the con∣fines of Bristoll to 60, and thence to the borders of S. Mi∣chael to 60: But at the coasts of Aethiopia, neere the Atlan∣tick shores, it riseth not higher then in the Adriatick Sea: But neere the Ilands of Madera, the Canaries, and S. Thomas, it surpasseth not the hight of Venice: But in America, on the hithermost coast from Florida Sinus Mexicanus, the coasts of Brasile and Pari , more then three thousand leagues, euen to the Magellane straights it increaseth almost to two Palmes bredth: but farther South to Panama, and all those Southerne shores, the ebbing and flowing is of an excessiue hight, as may appeare by the coasts of Cambaia, India, and Taprobana: Thirdly, if the Moone by a naturall vertue should moue the Waters of the Sea, then would it moue the Ocean and the Me∣diterranean Seas in the course of windes, with the same Fluxe and Refluxe in the same windes. But this thwarts experience, which is thus proued: The Mediterranean Sea, when as it flowes in the Adriaticke, Ionian, and Sycilian Seas, the Water flowes towards the Land, when the Moone is (as the Marri∣ners speake) in Sirocco and in Maestro ; but ebbes or flowes backe from the Land, when it is in Graeco at{que} Garbinio : And contrariwise the Ocean swells when the Moone is in Graece and Garbinio ; but asswageth it selfe againe when it is carried in Sirocco and Maestro. Fourthly, if the ebbing and flowing of the Sea should follow the Moone, then all places in the same distance should ebbe & flow alike at like houres. But the con∣trary is proued by an experiment of Patricius, who reports, that at the same houre places distant 20 degrees, haue bin seen to ebbe or flow alike, and the places betwixt also to vary and obserue no iust proportion. Fourthly, if these Surges should be stirred vp by the Moone, then the same superficies of the Wa∣ter the same houre should bee carried by the Moone: but this i contrary to the obseruations of Marriners, who haue obser∣ued, that on the Norman coasts, and that of Picardy to Callice, the Tide happeneth the ninth houre from Midnight: but ten miles from the shore not a full houre, but at the twenty and sixt mile from the middle of the channell, and vnder the same Meridian at 22 houres. Fiftly, if the ebbing and flow∣ing should proceed from the Moone, then should the Water at the same houres increase and decrease: but this is opposite to obseruation: for at Venice the Sea is knowne to flow sometimes for seuen, sometimes for eight; but ebbes in few∣er houres, But about the mouth of the Riuer Senega in the Atlanticke, it is comming in fo re houres, but goes not backe vnder eight: so about Go umniae Ostia, the Tide is comming in seuen houres, but goes backe in fiue. Sixtly, if the Waters flow by the Moone, then should they bee drawne and carried by the light of the Moone: because all action is by a touching, and the Moone toucheth the Water by her light: but it is found by experience, that at midnight, when the Moone is most distant in her light, our seas doe no lesse ebbe and flow then when it is present: & so the Seas neere the Antipodes doe ebbe & flow, when the Moone is present with vs. 7 ly , if the Moone were the onely ancient cause of this motion, then the same light being present the same agē mouing, the same effect should necessarily follow. But we find that it produceth two, contrary one to the other: because in her ascent to the Meridi∣an it is supposed to lift vp the water, but a little declining from the Meridiā, it is thought to depresse & asswage the waters, 8 ly if this eff ct were ascribed to the light of the Moone, then whē the Moone shines not, there should be no such motion▪ because contrary causes produce contrary effects. But wee obserue the same ebbing & flowing in the cōiun tion or New Moon, whē she hath no light, as in the full Moone, when with full face she beholds the Sea: for in both these times we haue highest ides These & many more argumēts are vrged by Patricius, to shew that the Moone cannot be the cause of this motiō in the Sea: of the other opiniō, that this effect is ascribed to the Sun▪ amongst. others I find the chiefe patron to be T esius, who taught that the Sea was moued in this wise, because it would auoide the operation of the Sun, fearing lest it should bee too much dissol∣ued into vapours, and so perish. But this opinion seemeth far more weake then the former. For first I would aske concer∣ning this motion, wherein it is thought to auoide the Sunnes heat, whether it be voluntary, or necessary? It cānot be Volun∣tary, o a free action, because the Sea is no liuing creature, to which only such a motion is incident: If it be necessary, then it is Naturall or Violent: It cannot bee Naturall, because accor∣ding to Aristotle, one Body can haue but one naturall motion, but the Water being a simple Body, hath another motion to fall downewards towards the Center: wherefore it cannot also admit of this. It cannot be violent▪ first, because no vio∣lent thing can be perpetuall. Secondly▪ no cause can be though vpon Externall▪ which should cause this violent motion: and if any such cause there be found, then is not this of Telesius the first and principall cause, sith it is referred to a farther cause: Thirdly, no cause can here be shewne according to this opini∣nion, why all other waters, as fresh Riuers, should not likewise striue to ide themselues from the face of the Sun. Fourthly, hee should giue a reason why in the Belgicke and Armoricke shores▪ which are far more distant from the Sun, the same mo∣tion is no lesse eminent then in Taprobana, which is subiect to the Torride Zone; and why in the Iland of S. Thomas, which is immediatly vnder the Equatour, there is not a greater work∣ing of the Water then at Venice. Fifthly, that which Telesius brings to confirme his opinion, is no lesse warrantable then the maine point in controuersie. In the Summer (saith he) the flo ds are lesser▪ because the Sun raiseth vp thinner vapour , which are e sily dissolued: But in the Winter they are lesse, because the Sunne is of least force, and so raiseth vp fewer va∣po rs to worke vpon the Sea: But both these matters are pro∣ued alse by experience: first because in the Summer wee haue as great a working of the water as at other times: In the Win∣ter also as great, or greater. Secondly (saith the said Author) in the full Moone the motion is greater, because the much light arising from the Moone, drawes vp many vapours. the New Moone; because the Aire being refrigerated, the in∣ternall Heat of the sea collecting it selfe, is made stronger with more vapours: In the quarters of the Moone, because there is not much light ca t from the Moone, and the Heat of the sea is not so much collected by the externall cold of the Aire: To all these matters wee may easily answer: First, how can the Moone bestow any light on our seas, when shee is with the Antipodes ? Secondly, where he saith, that the inter∣nall Heat is gathered together, and made stronger by externall cold; 1 First I aske how the sea can send forth these vapours; if the vapours kept vnder doe raise the sea vp; or if the Sea swell with these vapours in her wombe, how can she let them out? 2 How will he proue the Sea naturally to be hot, sith it is one of the cold Elements? Thirdly, where he saith, that the light of the Moone is but in halfe imparted to the Sea; why should not the Sea proportionally in halfe be stirred vp? wher∣fore Patricius and Casman finding neither the Sunne nor the Moone of it selfe to be a sole or sufficient cause of this moti∣on▪ hauing ioyned them both together in this causality, and added besides other particular causes: first (say they) there are two kind of causes concurring to that effect: either Vni∣uersall and externall ; or Particular, internall and next causes. The Vniuersall causes are two; to wit, the Sunne and the Moone. The Sunne (saith he) with the heat of his beames and light doth conserue, viuificate, and stirre vp to action; the Inter∣nall and originall heat in all things here below. This Heat be∣ing stirred vp and viuificated, all things are made fit for moti∣on▪ and being so accommodated, are stirred vp to motion, as if from an Internall life they should be promoted to an Exter∣nall : for as in the prim ry life of things, the motion and action is shewn: in the Essence, in the secondary, the action and moti∣on outwardly in respect of other things: so the first and ori∣ginall heat of the Sea▪ cherished, & stirred vp by the external heat of the Sun, driues the Ocean, and moues it to action▪ The Moone also cherisheth, preserueth, viuificates, nourisheth, and stirres vp to motion, all these earthly humours and moistures: and as she dayly by houres beholds the Sun as her darling and by him is (as it were) big-bellied with liuely seedes, so she beholdes her loue, the Ocean, dayes and nights, and fills the O∣cean with these seeds which she receiues from the Sunne. But this cannot be performed without her motion, without the dif∣fusion of her light, without the effusion of her influēce & seeds; wherefore it cannot otherwise bee, but all our humours and moistures should be made fruitfull, conceiue life, bring forth, beare fruit, and be stirred vp to life and motion, by the motion of the Moone, through the Aspect of the Moone with the Sun, with the Earth, with the Ocean : wherfore all lower moistures are subiect to the power of the Moone: Notwithstanding all are not aequally vnder her dominiō; sith all are not of the same substance, of the same Rarity, or density, or of the same Heat. reasons all aged from the Caspian Sea, may be ascribed to the thicknesse of the water, not suffering any thing to sinke into it: So that for the crassitude of it, it must needs be heauier then other Water, and so, more vnapt for motion. Thirdly, it is recorded by some that in the inmost creeke of the Red sea there is a motion▪ and so in the mouth of it, by reason of the Ocean ; but in the middle no such matter is to be obserued: which strange effect some ascribe to the Thinnesse of the Wa∣ter (one of the cause aboue named) begetting fewer and wea∣ker Vapours and Spirits: which either streightway breath out, or are too weake to raise vp the Water. This thinnesse is con∣firmed to be in that midle part of the Red sea, not onely out of the authority of Iohn Barro, out of the experiments of Iohn de Castro, which found this Water to be cleare and liker to Christall, then that of other parts; but also by the cleare per∣spicuity of it: For in almost all the sea may the bottome plain∣ly be seene. Fourthly, we reade the like of the Baltick sea: that it neuer ebbes or flowes, which Bartholomew Kackerman, that countri-man, ascribe , 1. To the Narrownesse of the channell: 2. To the depth of it,. 3. To the northerne situation: which cause I thinke hee might well haue spared, considering that more Northerne seas then that, both ebbe and flowe. Fiftly: it is reported of Maotis, Pontus, and Proppotis, that they flowe from the one to the other, but neuer ebbe: For Maotis flowes into the Pontick sea as from the Higher place into the lower: and the Pontick into the Propontick, & Aegean for the same cause, but returne not back againe. But besides this cause of this declinity of the ground, it standes with reason, that the Water should be fresher then that in other places of the sea: For first, all of them receiue into them many and great Riuers of fresh Water: for Maotis Palus, besides other par∣takes of Tanais. Into Pontus fall according to Arcanus re∣port about 52 fresh Riuers: whereof the chiefe are Ister, Hispanis, Boristhenes, Tanais, Phasis, all great currents. Se∣cōdly the forenamed fishes, which delight in fresh springs are here also found in abundance, Besides this freshnesse (if wee beleeue ancient writers, as Pliny and others) it is a sea of extraordinary depth, so that for this cause some part of it was called Negrepont, or the blacke-sea: Which blacknesse was by some, thought to arise from the depth of it: wherein in many places, they could sound no bottome. Sixtly, it is estified of the Tyrrhene, Ligurian, and Narbon seas, that they suffer not this motion: The cause of which is onely ascribed to the ex∣treame depth; for few or no Riuers are disburthened into it, except Rhodanus : We are in the next place to shew, why this working of the sea is more in one place then in another: The reasons whereof (although many be thought on) are chiefly re∣duced either to the exc sse of saltnesse in the water, or the nar∣rownesse of the channell, into which from an open place the sea is to be disburthened, or the shallownesse of the shore: All which either concurring together, or taken by themselues a∣part, may cause the sea to swell more in one place thē another; which may, as the former, bee proued by diuerse Instances. Foure Seas are more particularly noted to flow and swell higher then other. The first is that compasseth about Europe ▪ from Hercules pillars, which according to diuerse shores, takes diuerse names; as the Portugall, Cantabrian, Gallican, Belgicke, and British Seas. And in the New World, or Ameri∣ca, the Southerne Sea shall be the second: The third is that of Cambaia and India : The fourth is that, which compasseth a∣bout Taprobana: for the three last, the causes fore-specified, seeme manifestly to concurre: for Taprobana is reported by Pliny to haue a shore not aboue sixe paces deepe, and the Sea to be greene and ouergrowne with weeds, in so much that the tops of the weedes fret their ships; and later Writers report, that the Land is knowne to augment the confines by reason of the shallownesse of the Water: so as wee haue shewed that some Seas neither ebbe nor flow by reason of the depth of the channell; so on the other side must it follow, that other Seas ebbe and flow more by reason of the shortnesse and shallow∣nesse of the shores: for of contrary c uses proceede ordinarily contrary effects. Moreouer it stands with experience, that in any Water or Sea, where the flood is stopped and hindred by quicke-sands, it returnes with greater force, as it were enra∣ged, and swel so much the higher, which is the cause why in the coasts of Cambaia it is li ted vp so high, because the shores are so shallow, and so short, and exposed to impediments, that in the ebb , the Sea ns backe many miles, & leaues the sand vncouered: Whence it must needs returne with greater vio∣lence. This also is found in the Indian Sea, and neere Panama in the Southerne Sea, where the Sea rūning back for two leagues, certaine Ilands and Lands are left naked; so that in these three Seas here named, the Sea seemes to enlarge its limits in bredth more then in other places; to which we may ascribe this ef∣fect. For the Seas about Europe, wee may pronounce also that for the most part they haue short & shallow shores, as may ea∣sily appeare in the confines of Belgia: But it may be obiected of the English shores, that they swell very high, albeit the depth of the Water in the middle is found to be 144 foot: Here must we haue recourse to the other cause, the flowing of a large & wide sea into a narrow channell: for the large torrents of wa∣ter running swiftly into a narrow channell, being hindred on both sides by the shores, from spreading it selfe in bredth, is enforced to swell in hight: so that the effect is rather to be as∣cribed to the violence of a gre t current, enbosoming it selfe into a streite channell: which may more euidently shew it selfe in 3 instances: For in the streite chanels of Zeland and Holland it is lifted vp about three foote: At Bristoll in England, by reason of a greater force of Waters running from the Sea into a more narrow channell, and seconded by the maine Oce∣an at the backe, it swels to the hight of 60 foote: In the Ar∣morean seas, where larger seas are emptied into more narrow streites then the former, it increaseth to 90 foote: Out of which experiments may wee plainely collect, that to the in∣crease of the moti n of the sea besides the saltnesse of the Wa∣ter, two other causes are concurring; to wit, the shallownesse of the shore, and the streitnesse of the channell, wherein a great and large sea is to bee ex erated. This may lastly bee farther illustrated from the disparity of these seas with others, for in the Adriaticke, Egaan, Ionian, and almost all the African sea , the sea seldome swels to so great a measure: whereof the cause is as well the depth of the seas, as the equality of th shores: for as the depth is a cause that sometimes it flowes not at all, and the inequality and shortnesse of the shore that it flowes high: so a meane hight of the Waters from the bot∣tome, and a more equall figuration of the coasts may bee a cause of an indifferent working of the Water. Hitherto wee haue shewed the variety of motion in the sea, in regard of the diuersity of places: wee are next to speake something concer∣ning the variation of it in regard of the times, which, though it properly appertaine not to Geography, yet am I loath to leaue it out, because the discourse is pleasant. Concerning which point, the Marriners make six degrees of change in the tides according to the times. First diurnall, whereof wee speake in this discourse: The second Hebdomedary, or weeke∣ly which Possidonius called monethly or weekely; because it is distinguished by seuerall weekes of a moneth: but tarries not till the end of the moneth: For it is found by experience of Nauigatours that a day before the coniunction of the Moone with the Sunne, and the day of coniunction, and a day after∣wards, the seas in the maine Ocean haue their greatest flowes and ebbes, being lifted higher and laid lower downe, and then the tides are most swift: The fourth day from the con∣iunction, the tide is lesse and lesse swift: The fift yet lesse then then the former; and the sixt day lesse then the fift: But in the seuenth day, which is a day before the quarter, and in the eight following, wherein it is halfe-faced ; and in the ninth, which is a day after the quarter, the sea is, as it were, dead, not much stirring, neither much ebbing or much flowing; which was (as it seemes) only obserued by Pliny in the Euboian Euripus ; but whether it so happen else-where, I leaue to men experi∣enced in these matters; This motion as it doth encrease accor∣ding to the age of the Moone: So it is said proportionally to decrease againe. The third motion is monethly, which seemes in the time of the cōiunction, wherein the sea-tides are highest and swiftest. The fourth is called motus semestris or six-month∣ly, happening at the times of the Equinoctiall; differing one from the other like monethes; The fift is called Trimestris, because it happeneth onely in three moneths distance. The last is Annuall which Patricius witnesseth that himselfe saw in Liburnia, in the moneth of Ianuary. These motions I careles∣ly passe ouer, because the distinction seemes to me full of vn∣certainty and s arce warranted; and such experiments as are brought for the proofe of it concerne rather particular places, then the generall nature of the sea. 3 Hitherto of the generall motion of the sea: The Speciall is that, which is obserued in some speciall places. 1 It is probable that the sea is carried somewhere from East to West, and somewhere from North to South, and contrariwise. It hath beene a receiued opinion amongst Philosophers of this later age, that the sea by the rapture of the heauens should be moued round, as it were, in a diurnall course: which they haue l boured to proue by diuers experiments. First, because it is obserued by Marriners that a ship can well saile from Spaine into America with an indifferent winde in 30 dayes, when she can hardly returne vnder three moneths, which they ascribe to the circular motion of the sea: For a ship going from East to West sailes with the Water, but from West to East against the streame, so that the one must needes bee swif∣ter and the other slower. Their second experiment to con∣firme this point, is of a ship sayling from Spaine to Holland, which may as they say swifter returne backe then goe thi∣ther. To this motion of the Water from East to West, Iulius Scaliger hath added another, which he would haue to be from North to South, from Terra Laboratoris Southward. But Pa∣tricius not denying these motions, would haue many more in diuerse seas, not admitting any vniuersall circular motion en∣forced by the heauens, but various motions diuersly dispo∣sed in diuers seas, for which hee giues many instances, some whereof wee will here relate. First going about to disproue Scaligers opinion and experience, hee brings the experiment of the Portugall Nauigatours, who testifie that they came from Mosambicke of the side on Madagascar into Malebar in 28, sometimes in 30, other times in 35 dayes: which is farre from the accompt of Scaliger, who would not haue a ship to passe it under three moneths, out of which he labou∣red to proue this motion of the sea, because the shippe was longer a going then returning. The second experiment hee takes from the obseruation of one Iohn Eupolius, who willing to passe from the port of S. Blasi , which is beyond the Cape of good hope in Africke to Melinde towards the Indies, could not goe forward by reason that the currents, (as they call them (droue them backe from Melinde to Pate, a towne by this side of the Indyes: whence hee would conclude that the Water should in this place rather runne from West to East towards the Indies. The third experiment is drawne from the testimony of Thomas Lope, who when he was to passe from the Cape of good hope towards the Indies, testifies that the current of the Water was so violent, that it oftentimes leapt into the forepart of the shippe. The fourth is from the testi∣mony of Iohannes Guietanus, who putting forth from Tidor, came into Spaine before the sixteenth moneth: This iourney from Tidor to the Cape of good hope, containes 55 leagues, which makes 1650 miles: from this to the Iland of S. Hele∣na by the relation of another pilot are 1400 miles: from whence to the Equinoctiall circle are 1600 miles: from hence to Spaine by the computation of degrees, are not aboue 1520 miles: of all which the summe is, 7114. Now if wee take out of sixteene moneths 49 dayes, wherein the ship a∣gainst Cape of good hope, was carried hither and thither (which the marriners call Voltegiair ) and 70 other dayes wherein it stood still in the coasts of Guinea in Melacia, there will re∣maine a whole yeere spent in this iourney: which dayes if we diuide by those 7114 miles, there will be allotted to euery day no more then 19 miles, which euidently shewes that this iourney was most short in respect of the swiftnesse of the Nauigations. For if the Ocean should driue his currents to S t H l na euen to the west, they had ended their iourney in a farre lesser time, because those currents (as they say) carry the ship. But this iourney was accomplished very slowly: wherefore the currents were not carried from East to West, a S aliger relates. Likewise from sundry other experi∣ments, hee goes about to proue that it constantly cannot bee obserued to flow from North to South, as the said Scaliger af∣firmes, but that it is various according to diuers places. Neuer∣thelesse, that the Sea should haue a perpetuall current from the Poles towards the Equatou , seemes to stand as well with Reason, as Experience: For all men must needs confesse, that the motion of the Heauens vnder the Equatour, must bee much swifter then neerer the Poles, because the circles of it are greater neere the Equatour. Now▪ by how much swifter the motion of the Heauen is, by so much more is the Rarefa∣ction of the Aire, or other Elementary bodies right vnder it: whether it be Aire (as it is most probable) or Fire as Peripate∣tick imagine: But howsoeuer we determine that controuer∣sie, it must needs be that the Aire must suffer Rarefaction, an∣swerable to the swiftnesse of the motion: if not immediatly by the swift motion of the Heauens, yet by a consequent by the greater feruour of the Fire, which vnder the Equatour must needs be greater and of more force then about the Poles▪ whence the parts of the Aire vnder it, must partake more de∣grees of Heat, and by necessary consequence suffer a greater Attenuation. 2 The Sun-beames being darted perpendicu∣larly, cannot choose but attenuate and rarifie the Aire more vnder the Line, then in places more declining to the Poles. This ground thus laide, these two consectaries will follow: 1 That the Aire thus attenuated, must needes take vp a lar∣ge place then it before possessed, which cannot be but by in∣larging it selfe towards either Pole, either North or South; whence the parts of the Aire in those places must bee more thickned and condensated. 2 That these parts of the Aire carried towards the Poles, and meeting with the cold Regions of the North and South, must by condensation turne into wa∣ter, and so fall downe in Raine or Snowes; whence the Water encreasing neere the Poles perpetually, must haue a perpetuall current towards the Equatour, where they are againe exhau∣sted in vapours by the Heat of the Sunne; in such sort, that as well the parts of the Sea betwixt themselues, as the waters in regard of the Aire, may proportionally maintaine themselues by the mutuall transmutation. To this reason some haue added another, that the Sunne soiourning in the Southerne Signes, is neerer to the Earth, then when hee is in the North, by the whole Latitude of his excentrice, and therefore of greater force to draw the water toward the South: But whether this Reason be of any great force, I will not spent time to dispute: let euery man vse his own iudgment. It seemes to me a conie∣cture not improbable, that these currents may bee also varied according to diuers reasons of the yeere; as also according to diuers channels, by diuers crossings and doublings of the Tides, as wee find in diuers places: but I will not be too bold in this opinion, because I loue not to walke without a guide in these vncertainties. 4 Of the Naturall motion of the Sea we haue spoken: It remaines we speake somewhat of the Violent: The Violent motion is that which is stirred vp by windes. The consideration of windes is either absolute or respectiue: Absolute I call that wherein the Naturall effects and proper∣ties of the winds are handled; which properties belong to the naturall Philosopher, they being (according to Aristotle ) a Naturall body vnperfectly mixt: The Respe tiue considera∣tion is that wherein the windes are considered in respect to the errestriall Globe. This Respect againe twofold, either in regard of the whole Spheare of the Earth, whereof they de∣signe out the points of the Horizon by certaine lines called Rhumbas ; or else in respect of the Sea, to which they giue a motion. The former respect we haue handled in our first booke of Geography : The later is more proper to this place; & how∣soeuer the wind is an exhalation, common as well to the Earth as to the Sea, affecting both with some alteration; yet because it more neerely affecteth the Sea as his proper Prouince and Dominion, and hath for the most part beene most obserued of Sea, men and Marriners; Wee thought fit to treat of it in this place. Of windes some are vncertaine and various, which in all places interchangeably supply their turnes, keeping no cer∣tainty or regularity in times or places: others are called, set or standing windes, because they are obserued to blow at certaine time, and places▪ of both which, as much as concernes our purpose, we shall speake in these two Theoreme . 1 To some certaine places, at certaine times be∣long certaine windes. These windes are by some, called Anniuersary because they blow at a certaine season euery yeere; of these there are ma∣ny kindes mentioned by Nauigatours. The first and chiefest is that which they call the Etesian winde, which is obserued to blow euery yeere from the Northeast about the rising of Dog-starre, and oftentimes continues about 40 dayes. This wind driues the Seas from Pontus into the Egean Sea, euen so farre as Egypt. In the second place may wee range such windes as are called Chelidonian, because they arise at the first comming of the Swallowes. It blowes sometimes from the Direct-west, so that of some it is taken to be the same. Some∣times from the North-west, so that with others it is accounted among the North windes: These Chelidonian winds driuing from the North or North-west still fill all the Mediterranean euen to the coasts of Syria and Palestine, and continue in the summer time for many dayes together. In the third place may we accompt that winde, which Columbus perceiued on the coast of Portugall comming ouer the Atlanticke Ocean, which at some times of the yeere was carried higher, at other times cleauing (as it were) to the bosome of the Sea, whence hee probably coniectured that it was deriued from some moist land, whereon hee aduentured on the first search of America and layed the first worke of that discouery. Fourthly to these windes may be reduced those yeerely flowings of the Persian and Indian Seas, which the Portugall marriners call Motions. The Persian Sea suffers such a kind of motion euery yeere while the Sunne runnes through the Southerne degrees, and when he arriues at the end of Sagittarius it is shaken with an extraordinary great tempest: On the contrary side the Indian Sea, while the Persian is moued, is obserued to rest without any great motion; and when the Persian is still, it suffers great motion, especially when the Sunne first enters into Cancer. This last motion seemes to be not only deriued from the Pro∣uinciall windes, but some other concurrent causes: whether these winds are the cause of the currents before spoken of, is a very disputable point, which I leaue to others to search out. Of euery set winde blowing a part of the yeere on the coast of America, Acosta treats at large, to which hee ascribes the cur∣rents forespoken of in this chapter. 2 The violence of windes makes the Sea some∣times in some places, transcend his ordinary bounds. How far the Sea by violence of windes hath trespassed on the land, many haue learned to their great losse and calamity. It is obserued sometimes in the Venetian shores, that the Sea driuen with winds swels so high, that ouerflowing all the banks and channels, the Inhabitants are enforced to row in boates from house to house: Their cesternes are infected with Salt-water, and their precious waters in vaults and cellars spoyled. The like hath heretofore beene found (if we will credit Histories) in the Belgicke Sea, on which the Northwest windes blow with such vehemency and so long that it brake downe the ordinary banks; and in Zeland and Holland swal∣lowed vp many townes with infinite multitudes of people. Which seemes to be warranted by a report, I haue heard of many trauaylers, that in a calme tide the topps of towres and steeples haue beene seene aboue the water. Besides these in∣stances, we may adde the testimony of Strabo and Aristotle in his booke de munda : with diuers other relations of strange in∣undations whereof wee shall haue more occasion to speake hereafter. CHAP. VII. Of the Depth, Situatio, and Termina∣tion of the Sea. 1 T He Absolute proprieties of the Sea being hitherto passed ouer: we will consider next the comparatiue: which agree to the Sea no otherwise then in respect or comparison with the Earth; which are chiefly thre ; 1 Depth, 2 Situa∣tion, 3 Termination. 2 The Depth or Profundity is the distance be∣twixt the Bottome and the Superficies of the Water. To find out the Absolute depth of the Sea, is a matter of the greatest difficulty, and by many thought impossible, in respect as well of the immensity of it in many places where no line could, as of the various places, too many to bee serched out by mans industry: yet where absolute science failes, there pro∣bable coniecture takes place, and is best accepted, which wee will venture to propose in this o r Theoreme. 1 The ordinary depth of the Sea is commonly answerable to the ordinary hight of the maine land aboue the water: and the whirle-pooles and extra∣ordinary depths answer to the hight of the moun∣taines aboue the ordinary hight of the Earth. It hath been a common receiued opinion among ancient Cos∣mographers, that the depth of the Sea being measured by a line and plummet, seldome exceeds two or three miles, ex∣cept in some few places neere Sueuian shores, and some places about Pontus obserued by Pliny. But as Breedwood a worthy late writer obserues, this position is not to be vnderstood ge∣nerally, but only of the depth of the Streits or Narrow Seas, which were perhaps onely searched by then ancients who dwelt far from the maine Ocean: But another accompt is ne∣cessarily to be giuen of the maine Ocean. This being a matter of great vncertainty, wee will follow the conceit of the forena∣med Author. It hath been shewed in the former Chapter, that the most probable opinion concerning the manner of the first separation of the dry land from the wa ers would haue the Earth by the Creation to be cut into diuers sluces & channels, apt to receiue Water. Now these materiall p rts of the Earth, being taken out to giue way to hollownesse, were not vtterly annihilated, but by an almighty hand in some other places, ma∣king by their addition the superficies of the Earth in such pla∣ces higher then before: whence by reason it seemes to bee collec ed, that the ordinary Eminency of the hight of the Earth at o e the Waters, should bee answerable to the ordi∣n ry depth of the Sea. And if Hills and Mountaines be compa∣red, wee may s t them against the Deepes and extraordinary While-pooles and Gul es: And so betwixt the Sea and Land▪ and the parts of the one and the other we may settle a kind of agreement and proportion: In a matter of so great vncertain∣ty, no man will e pect an euident domonstra ion. 3 The Site is the position of the Sea in respect o the Earth. Concerning the site of the Sea in respect of the Earth; wee must consider the Water and Earth two wayes▪ First Abso∣lutely as they are Elements and solide Bodyes: Secondly, in re∣spe t of the superf ies of either▪ if we consider the whole so∣lide Body of the Water as that of the Earth, we must confesse without all doubt, that the Water hath the higher place, be∣ing lighter then the Earth; of which situation wee haue spo∣ken in the first booke: for although some parts of the Earth are thought (by most as we shall proue) to be aboue some parts of the Water, yet is this of no sensible proportion in respect of that vast Masse of Earth, couched vnder the Waters betwixt them and the Center of the World. But the question is here of the superficies of the Water, compared to the superficies the Earth vncouered, which should be higher in place; of which shall be this Theoreme. 1 The superficies of the Sea is some-where higher then the superficies of the Earth, some-where lower. There hath beene a great dispute among Phylosophers con∣cerning the po ition of the Sea in respect of the Land, whether it bee higher or lower: some haue beene of an opini∣on, that the Water is higher; which opinion was de∣fended by Tully, in his Booke De Natura Deorum, where hee saith, that the Sea being placed aboue the Earth, yet couering the place of the Earth, is congregated and collected, neither redounding, nor flowing abroad▪ which afterwards seemes to be seconded by diuers learned Diuines, who reducing most things to the supernaturall and first cause, diuers times neglected and ouer-slipt the second. Hence Saint Basil in his 4 Homily on the Hexameron, lest the water (saith hee) should ouerflow and s red it selfe out of the place it hath occupied, it is commanded to gather it selfe together: otherwise what should hinder the Red Sea to ouer flow all Egypt, being lower then it elfe, vnlesse it were manicled with the Creatours power, as it were with setters: to which also afterwards seeme to subscribe Aquin , Dionisius, and Catharinus, with diuers other Diuines, who held that the first discouery of the Earth, and the gathering together of the Waters in the first Creation, was made not by any mutation in the Earth, but by a violent accu ulation of the Waters, being (as it were) restrained and bridled supernaturally, that they could not transcend certain limits and bounds. To confirme this o∣pinion, some reasons are alleaged by moderne Philosophers: first because it is the orde of all the Elements amongst them∣selues, that the Earth, as the heauiest, should take the lower place▪ and the water should ascend aboue: Secondly, because Marriners comming from the maine Ocean to the Land, seeme to see the land farre lower then the Water: Thirdly they alleage tha place of I b, whe e God himself professeth, that he hath bounded the Water , in these words. Hi∣therto shal thou come, and no farther, & here shall thy proud waues be stayed. But this opinion seemeth very improbable▪ that God in the first institution of Nature should impose a per∣p tuall violence vpon Nature: sith w ee the Creator in o∣ther ma ters to vse Nature as his ordinary eruant▪ and to ad∣minister the Regiment of things by econd causes. Neither were the authority of these Diuines so great in th se Cosmo∣ r phicall conceipts, to ouersway these of the same profession▪ who could more exactly iudge of these matters. Neither are these reasons of so grea validity as to enforce assent. For first whereas S t Basill seemes to wonder why the Red Sea should not ouer lowe all Aegypt, if it were not supern turally boun∣ded; he takes that as granted, which is the question in contro∣versie, that the Water is higher: for which he can produce no other reason, th n the Testimony of the sense: but this is very weak, forasmuch as in such matters the sense is oftentimes de∣ceiued, as stands well with the grounds of the perspectiues: for (as weare there taught) two Parallels will in the end seeme to concurre so far as the sight can iudge. Now the Spheare of the Heauens, and the Sphericall segment of the Waters being parallell the one to the other, will necessarily seeme to con∣curre to the end: whence it must needs come to passe, that that part of the Sea must seeme o lift it selfe higher, nd con∣trarywise the He uens will seeme somewhat lower then in∣deed they are: and this I take to be the true cause why the Sea being seene a great way off, may appeare raised aboue the land whereon we stand. Another reason may bee giuen from the perpetuall Refraction of the vsuall Lines comming from the Sea to our sight. For the Aire neere the Sea being alwayes intermixed with thicke watrish vapours rising vp, the Se must of necessity be presented in a thicker Medium by a refra∣cted sight: whence cōsequently it must seeme greater & higher then indeed it is: for as the Opticks teach, all things seeme grea∣ter & higher in a thicker Medium. To the other three Reasons brought to cōfirme this assertion it is no hard thing to answer. To the first which would out of the order of the Elements in∣force, that the Water is higher hen the Earth; I answer (as before) that if we intirely consider these Elements among t themselues, we must giue the hight to the Water; for as much as the greatest part of the E rth lies rowned; for that aboue bea es no sensible proportion in respect of the parts of the Earth vncouered. But here we compare not the 2 Elements intirely betwixt themselues, but the superficies of the Water with the parts of the Earth vncouered, habitable: which su∣perficies of the earth notwithstanding, this reason, may bee higher then the Water: Secondly, where they produce the testimony of the sight; for my own part, I can warrant no such experience, hauing neuer launced far into the deep: yet if any such experiment be auouched, it may easily bee answered out of opticall Principles▪ that comming out of the maine Ocean towards the land, by reason of the sphericall conue ity of the water, interposed betweene our sight, and the lower part of the land, those land parcels must needs seeme lesse, as hauing some parts shadowed from our fight: whence it must conse∣quently appeare lower, as couched almost vnder water. From the 3 d reason grounded on Scripture, whereon our diuines seeme most to depend, nothing else is concluded, but that Al∣mighty God hath set certaine bounds & limits which the Wa∣ters should not passe: These bounds & limits I take not to be supernatural, as if the water restrained by such a power should containe it selfe, within its own circuit. But naturall as clif s & ils, within which, the waters seems intrenced. This opinion therefore being disliked, others haue laboured to defend an op∣posite position, that the water is lower then the Earth altoge∣ther: which opinion beares more constancy with the doctrine of Arist. & most of our modern Philosophers. The reason wher∣on this assertion is grounded, be chiefly these: 1 If the sea were higher then the Earth, what should hinder the water of it frō flowing broad, & ouerwhelming the Earth: sith all men will confesse, that the water is by nature disposed to moue down∣wards to the lower place. If they haue recourse to supernatural oūds, besides that we haue spoken cōcerning the interpreta∣tiō of such places of Scripture, as seeme to fauour this opiniō▪ we nswere as before, that it is very improbable, that God in the first creation should impose such a perpetuall violence: se∣condly, we read that in the vniuersal deluge wherein all the world was drowned, God brake open the springs of the deep & opened the Cataracts of heauen to powre down raine con∣tinually many daies together vpon the Earth: Of which there had beene no necessity at all; had the sea beene hea ed vp in such sort as they imagine: For the only withdrawing of that hand and letting goe of that bridle which gaue the water that restraint, would haue beene ufficient to haue ouerwhelmed the whole Earth. The second reason is taken from Ilands in the sea which are nothing else but parts of the land raised vp aboue the water. Thirdly we find by experience, that a ship carried with the like wind is driuen so swiftly from the port into the open sea, as from the sea into the port, which could not be done if the sea were higher then the land: for it must needs be, that a ship if it were to be carried to a higher place, should be moued slower then if it came from an higher to a lower▪ Fourthly all Riuers runne into the sea from the inner parts of the land which is a most euident signe, that the land is higher then the sea; for it is agreeable to the nature of the wa∣ter, to flow alwaies to the lower place, whence we gather that the sea shore, to which the Water is brought frō the land, must needs be lower; otherwise the water in rūning thither, should not descend but ascend. This opinion I hold farr more probable as being backt by reason, and the Authority of our best Philosophers: yet not altogether exactly true (as we shall shew hereafter.) But Bartholomew Keckermā in a late German writer holding these 2 former opposite opiniōs (as it were) in one equall Ballance, labours a reconciliation. In a di∣uerse respect (saith he) it is true that the sea is higher, and that it is lower then the Earth. It is higher in respect of the shores and borders, to which it so comes that sensibly it swells to a Globe or a circumference, and so at length in the middle raiseth vp it selfe and obtaines a greater hight then in those parts where in the middle of the sea it declines towards the shore: Of which parts the hight suffer such a decrease, that by how much neerer the shore they shall approach, by so much the lower they are in respect of the shore: in somuch that tou∣ching the shore it selfe, it is much lower then the Earth. For this opinion our Author pretends a demonstration: which hee grounds on the 4 chapter of Aristotle de Caelo, in his second booke, where hee puts downe these two positions; which he calls Hypotheses, or suppositions; First that the Water no lesse concurrs to the making of a Globe or circle, then the Earth: for it so descends naturally, that it doth sensibly gather it selfe together, and makes a swelling, as wee see in small dropps cast on the ground: Secondly the Water makes a cir∣cle which hath the same center with the center of the Earth: Out of these grounds would our Keckerman conclude the wa∣ter in some places to bee higher, in other places to bee lower then the Earth: And hence proceeds he to giue an answer to their reasons who haue affirmed the Earth to bee higher then the sea: What to thinke of the proposition or conclusion we will shew hereafter, but in the meane space I hold this conclusion not rightly inferred out of these premises: For first whereas he sayth that the water by nature is apt to gaher it selfe round into an orbe or spheare, I would demaund whe∣ther such a roud body hath the same center with the world, or a diuerse center: he cannot say that it hath a diuerse center, from the center of the Earth: First, because (as we haue de∣monstrated in our first part) the Earth and the Water haue but one center: and that the Water is concentricall with the Earth: Secondly from the second proposition or ground of his, out of Aristotle ; if he meanes such a sphaericity as hath the same center with the center of the Earth: I answer, first that he contradicts himselfe, because he giues an instance in small dropps cast on the ground, whose quantity being so small, and conuexity sensible, can in no mans iudgment be concen∣trick to the Earth. Secondly, out of this ground that the Spheare of the water is concentrick to the Earth, hee con∣futes himselfe; for according to the principles of Geometry, in a Spheare or circle, all the lines drawne from the center to the circumference must be equall. Then must all places in the circumference or superficies of a sphericall body be of equall hight from the center, and by consequence the sea being such a Sphericall body, cannot haue that inequality which Kecker∣man imagines it to haue: wherefore some other demonstati∣on must be sought for this conclusion. I will goe no further then that I haue spoken in the former chapter concerning the figure of the Water: Where I haue probably shewed it to be conicall ; and out of this may be easily gathered, how it may be higher then the land in some places, as of the middle of greater seas, where the head of the Cone is lifted higher; in other, lower; as in the narrow streits where the increase of the eminencie is also lesse. The grounds and principles of which we haue laied before. 1 The sea in respect of the Earth is higher in one place then another. Besides the naturall conformity of the Water to a coni∣call figure, (as we haue fore-shewed) whence one part of the superficies must be graunted to be higher then another: wee must needs in the sea acknowledge other accidentall causes which produce an inequality in the parts of the sea▪ The chiefest whereo are the Equality of inclination in all parts of the water to motion: And the inequality of the channells and shores: whence it commeth to passe that the Water of the sea being euery whereof it selfe equally inclined to motion, is notwithstanding vnequally receiued into channels, so that in some place, hauing (as it were) a large dominion to inuade, as in the maine Ocean, it falls lower and euener: In some other places as streites or narrow seas, the water hauing a large en∣trance from the Ocean, but litle or no passage through it, must needes swell higher, and so one place by accident be∣comes higher or lower then another: Which farther to con∣firme diuerse instances may be alleaged out of moderne and ancient obseruations, For diuerse histories giue testimony that sundry Kings of Aegipt by cutting the Isthmus or nar∣row neck of land lying betwixt the red sea & the Mediterrane∣an, laboured to make Africk an Iland & open passage from one sea to the other: but afterwards they were perswaded to desis from their enterprise: Some say, because they saw the red sea to bee higher then many parts of Aegipt, and hereupon fea∣red a generall inundation of all Aegipt, if the p ssage were broken open: Others haue deliuered that they feared, that if the passage from one vnto another were broke open, and the red sea hauing a vent that way, the red sea would become so shallow that men might wade ouer it, and so insteed of making Africk an Iland, it would haue been more ioyned to the Continent then before. Both opinions consent in this, that the waters of the red sea were by the perpēdicular found higher then in the Mediterranean : Moreouer it is obserued that the sea on the west part of America commonly called Mare Del Zur, is much higher then the Atlantick Sea which bordereth on the Easterne part of it: which gaue way to the coniecture of some, that the Isthmus betwixt Panama and Nombre D Dios had been long since cut through to haue made a passage into the Pacifick Sea, without sailing so arre about by the straits of Magellane ; had not many inconueni∣ences been feared out of the inequality in the hight of the wa∣ter. The like inequality is obserued by Verstegan in the sea betwixt England and France: For according to his coniecture, France and England being one Continent heretofore, and ioy∣ned by a narrow neck of land, betwixt Douer and Callais the water on one side was higher then on the other: which he probably collects out of the sundry flats and shallowes at this day appearing on the East side as well on the coasts of England as of Flanders, especially between Douer and Callis, called by some, our Ladies Sands, about three English miles in length▪ Out of which and sundry other probabilities, he la∣bours to proue that all the Low-countries were heretofore enueloped with the sea; till such time as the narrow land being either by Nature or Art cut through, and the Water al∣lowed a free passage, it became dry land: but this point wee shall discusse hereafter in place conuenient. 4 In the next place we are to consider the termination of the sea: The termination is the bounding of the sea within certain li∣mit . 5 The Limit is the margent or border of land wherein any sea is circumscribed. The sea is bounded by the land, as the land by the sea: In respect of which termination some seas are called Maine seas, others narrow. The maine seas are foure; to wi , the Atlan∣tick which taketh it's name from the mountaine Atlas, by which on the west side it passeth, and diuides Europe and A∣frick from America ▪ 2 The Aethiopian sea running on the west side of Aethiopia ▪ 3 The Indian Sea hauing the East Indies on the North ▪ 4 Mare Del Zur or the South sea, situate on the South side of America: Which foure in respect of other may be called Maine Oceans ▪ The lesser sea are either called Creekes, or streits; A Creeke is a place where the water (as it were) embosomes it selfe into the land, hauing an n∣trance large from the Ocean, and most commonly streytned inwardly, but no passage through: A Creeke againe may bee diuided into the greater or lesser: Vnder the former in a large sense may we comprehend the whole Mediterran an sea▪ for as much as▪ the ea from the Main Atlantick Ocean by an inlet is ingulfed into it, but findes no passage out any other way, howsoeuer it invades a large territorie. The les∣ser Creekes are againe distinguished into the Easterne and Westerne: The chiefe Creekes found out towards the East are sixe in number. 1. Sinus magnus which lies betwixt Mangus and India extra Gangem teaching as farre as the region of Chal i . 2. Sinus Gang ticus which is comprehended betwixt Aurea Chersonesus, and India intra Gangem. 3▪ Sinus Canthi, commonly called Canthi-colpus. 4. Sinus Persicus, bordering on Persia, and called by Plutarch the Babilonian Sea. 5. Sinus Arabicus, which is commonly called the Red S a. 6. Sinus Barbaricus, which by Pliny is termed Sinus Tr gloditicus & at this day Golpho de Melinde. The Creekes lying Westward∣ly are chiefly these; First Sinus Sarmaticus lying towards the North, betweene Denmarke and Normay, which is diuided in∣to Sinus Sinnicus and Bodi us, which is called commonly the Baltick Sea 2 Sinus Granuicus diuiding the Muscouites from the C relij Northward▪ it is commonly called the White Sea. 3 Sinus Mexicanus bordering on the city of Mexico in Ame∣rica, amongst these, some would number Mare Pacificum, or Mare D l Zur: but this we thought fitter to call a maine Sea, then a creeke, being extraordinarily large in quantity. A Strait is a narrow Sea between two Lāds; of such Straits these were anciētly knowne, to wit, 1 Fretum Graditanum, or the Straits of Gibraltar of 7 Miles distance, diuiding Spaine from Barba∣ry 2 Fretum Magellanni ū, found out by Magellane, which diuides A erica P ruana from the Southerne land, 3 Fretum Anian, situate betwixt the westerne shores of America, & the Easterne borders of Tartary. Besides these there haue bin dis∣couered 3 more, (to wit) 1 Pretum Dauis, found out by cap∣taine Dauis in the yeare 1586, which lyes toward Groenland. Fretum N souicum ▪ or Way gate, neare Noua Zembla, disco∣uered by the Hollāders in the yeare 1614. 3 Fretum de Mayre found out by William Schoute a Bauarian, taking his name from Isaa le M yre, by whose aduice and perswasion he vn∣dertook hi voyage. But some of these latt streits here men∣tioned, for ought I knowe, may b tter bee reckoned amongst Creekes, forasmuch as they haue not as yet found any pas∣sage through, though with great losse and danger they haue often attempted the Discouery. Concerning the bounding of the Sea with the land, we will insert th se Theoremes. 1 The Water is so diuided from the dry land, that the quantity of Water is greater in the South Hemispheare, of Land in the Nor∣therne. That most part of the dry land is situate towards the North, will easily appeare by instance. For toward the North are placed the great Continents of Europe, Asia, almost all A∣frica, and the greatest part of America: But in the South He∣mispheare, we find only a little part of Africa & America, be∣sides the South Continent, which we cannot imagine to be so great in quantity, as it is painted in our ordinary Mappes: for∣asmuch as all place at the first discouery are commonly de∣scribed greater then they are. The reason I take to bee this, that the first draught is alwaies confused and vnperfect, wher∣in a region discouers it selfe vnto vs vnder a more simple fi∣gure, neglecting curiosities; but after a longer and more ex∣act search of any Region, will be found in many places ingul∣fed with diuers Bayes, and variously indented; in such sort, as the bound Line compassing it round, making an inordinate figure, and lesse regular, cannot contain so much land as first it might seeme to promise. Moreouer we may further obserue, that those places which in the first discouery haue been taken for the maine Continent, or at least for some greater part of Land, haue afterward vpon more curious examination, been found clouen into many lesser Ilands: As in America, Cuba in the time of Columbus ; and California of late, thought to be a part of the Continent, and so described almost in all our Mapps; yet since by a Spanish Chart taken by the Hollanders, discouered to be an Iland. The like instance we haue in Terra del Fuog , which since the time Magellan, was held a part of the South Continent, till Schouten by sayling round about it▪ foūd it diuided frō the main l nd by Fr um de Mayre, car∣rying the name of the Master of the ship in his discouerie. Neither is it much to be doubted, but that in that large tract delineated out in the Globe for the South-Indies, are cōtained many Ilands, di ided one from the other by streites and nar∣row Seas, which must subtract much from the quantity of the dry land; so that of necessity it must be granted, that the Nor∣therne Hemispheare takes vp the greatest part of the dry land as the other of the Water. Wherefore that place of Esdras where he saith, That Almighty God allotted paris to the E th, and the Water; must r ther seeme im∣probable, or suffer anot er interpretation then that of the an∣ci nts. For out of credible coniecture drawne rom the view of the of the Terrestri l Globe, we shall hardly collect suc a prop rt on: In this comp rison of the N rth rne H mi∣sphe with the Southerne ▪ we shall find kind of Harmony betwixt the Heauens and the Earth: For, as Trauailers report, th Northerne parts abound with more starres, and of greater magnitude then the other toward the South ; so the Terrestri∣all Spheare disco ers vnto vs more con inent▪ greater Il nds, and of more no , in the North then n the South. 2 The whole Globe of the Earth is invi oned round from the East and the west with sea, di∣viding he North from the South. To proue this Theoreme we need goe no farther then the famous voyages of Magellane, Drake, Candish, and Scho ten ; Whereof the first attempted, the first passage through Fretum Magel anicum, and gaue it the name, though he could not out- iue his intended iourny. The two next followed the same way, and the last found out a new passage through Fretum de Mayre, as we haue formerly mentioned. Whence we may ea∣ ly deduce this Corollary, that the Southerne continent, not yet perfectly discouered, is either One, or (which is most proba∣ble) any Ilands: forasmuch as by sailing round about t, they haue found it euery where compassed round with Sea. The like may be coniectured of the other parts of the world, on the Northern side, whereof we shal speak in this next Theorē. 3 It is probable that the Earth is compassed round with the water from North to South. I know nothing which hath exercised the witts and indu ∣trie of the Nauigatours of our age, more then the finding out of a passage Northward to Cathay, and so to the East-Indies, which controuersie as yet remaines altogether vnan∣swered, and awaites the happinesse of some new discouery. In which difficult passage, wherein many haue spent both their liues and hopes, it may seeme enough for me to goe with their Relations; suffering my coniecture to flye no farther then their sailes. The reasons which I meet with in my slēder reading, I will examine as I can, without partiality, and so leaue euery man to bee his owne Iudge. First▪ then wee must cōsider that the voyage to the Indies must be effected by either of these two waies; to wit, Northward, or Southward, To beginne with the South, it must be performed two waies; ei∣ther by some vnknowne passage through the South-Conti∣nent neare the Antartick Pole, or neare the Magellane-straits. The former is most vncertaine, for want of discoueries in those vnknowne and remote parts: and if any such passage were found out, it were litle aduantage to our Countrey∣men, who haue already a shorter and nearer way: yet no in∣stance can bee giuen to the contrary, but that this part being clouen (as it seemes most probable) into many lesser lands, may admit of such a passage: But in such vncertainties it is as easy to deny as to affirme. The second South-passage is found out by Nauigatours, which is either by the strait of Magellane it selfe, or else through the Straights of Mayre before-men∣tioned, which this Age of ours hath put out of doubt. The third passage is South-east by the ape of good hope, knowne vnto our East-Indian Merchants, and therefore as a matter vnquestioned, needs no further examination. The onely matter which troubles men in this Ag , is the finding out of a passage Northward to Cathay, either by the North-east, or North-west ; wherein we will consider two things: 1 Whether it be likely, that any such passage should be at all? 2 whether this passage should be performed by the North-East, or North-West. For the former many argu∣ments are vrged which seeme to crosse this opinion, of a way to the Indies toward the North-parts : For The manifold attempts of the English and Hollanders, both towards the North-East and North-West, either altogether spent in paine or failing of their ends, seemes to giue large testimonie, if not of absolute impossibility, yet at least of the vnlikely-ho d of any such discouery as is hoped. For what cost or dangers would not almost all the Marriners of our Northerne world vndergoe, to find so neare a cut to their golden Indies ? and if by chance many of them mistooke the right way, yet would it seeme improbable, that latter Nauigatours corrected by the former errours, should not after so many trialls and at∣tempts, at length hit the marke. This reason sauours of some probability : yet comparing this with diuerse matters of the same kinde, would seeme to be of no great force. For the truth and right being onely one and the same, is oppo ed by infinite errours: so that it may seeme easier to commit a thou∣sand errours, then once to hit the truth: Time and long triall beget many Inuentions, which afterward seeme most easy: insomuch that many men haue afterward laught at their owne mistakes. Moreouer, for ought I can find in the Relations of most mens discoueries, the passage which they sought was too farre Northward towards the Pole; where being infe∣s ed with cold, Ice, and other inconueniences, they were enforced to returne thence againe, hauing seldome had a∣ny oportunity to winter in those parts for want of vi∣ctualls, or extremity of cold. A second reason against this North-passage may bee drawne from the innumerable sorts of beasts wherewith America is stored: for admit∣ting this passage, we must needs grant America to bee an I∣land. Now it is ertaine that Noah's Arke was the store-house and Seminary, not only of mankinde, but of all other perfect liuing Creatures. Againe, it is eui∣dent out of the Holy Scriptures, that the first Region whereon the Arke was deliuered of her burthen, was Asia. These grounds layed, I would demaund how such a multitude of beasts of all sorts, should be transported from A∣sia to America, being supposed to bee an Iland, and euery where diuided by the Sea from other parts of the Earth could these silly creatures of their owne accord swimme from one shore to another? but alasse the Sea was too large, and these beasts too fearefull to aduenture on such a voyage. And admit some by Nature had bin fitted to such an action, yet were it very strange to imagine the same effect of all, being of many kinds. What then? were they transported in ships? But Naui∣gation in those daies being an infant, vnfurnished of the Chart and Compasse, durst not aduenture into the Ocean so farre out of sight of land. But to giue the opposite part all reasonable aduantage, admit the Straites diuiding Asia and America were very narrow, and within kenne; was it likely that from hence th y could by shipps transport so many kndes of crea∣tures? Could we beleeue any man to be so mad, as to carry o∣uer with him Lions, Beares, Tigers, Foxes, and other innume∣rable sorts of rauenous and vnprofitable beasts, as pernicious to mankind, as other creatures seruing for his vse? If any were found so foolish or malicious, yet were it very vnlikely hee should transporte so many kinds. This argument seemes no more to concerne America, then most Ilands of the World, wherein we find diuers creatures, not only seruing for the vse of man, but many vnprofitable & hatefull to the Inhabitants: The meanes of this transportation is very difficult to finde. S t Augustine with some other Diuines haue bin driuen to a su∣pernaturall cause, as if Almighty God should performe this matter by the ministry of Angels, which answer we dare not vtterly reiect, being supported by the authority of so great a Pillar of the church: yet I cannot so easily imagine, that God who vsed naturall meanes for the preseruation of all li∣uing creatures in the Arke, should haue recourse to a superna∣turall power in the propagation of these creatures on the face of the Earth: wherefore to me the reason would seeme better answered out of our ground which we shall proue hereafter: That Ilands were not from the first Creation, but afterward broken from the maine Continent by the violence of the Wa∣ter: Hence it might come to passe, that such beasts as were in the parts of the Earth so broken off, haue since there continu∣ed by continuall propagation vntill this day; I meane of rave∣nous and hurtfull beasts: because of the others lesse doubt can be made, but that they might be convayed from one Country into another by shipping, to serue the necessity of mankind. Here we see that no argument as yet hath bin vrged so strong against the North-passage, but may with reasonable probability be answered. It remaines in the second place that we descend somewhat to particulars, to inquire whether this be to be effected either towards the North-east or the North-west: The North-east passage hath heretofore bin attempted by many of our English Nauigatours, but with vnhappy suc∣cesse: yet were not these voyages altogether fruitlesse; foras∣much as by this meanes, a way was found out to Russia, whence began the first trade betweene ours and the Russian Merchants: But that litle hope can hence arise, sundry reasons may be alleaged, the chiefe whereof are these; 1 The dange∣rous rending of the Scythick Cape, set by Ortelius vnder 80 degrees Northward, together with the perillous sailing in those Northerne Seas alwayes pestred with Ice and Snow, seconded by diuerse Bayes or shelues, mists, fogges, long and darksome nights, most aduerse to any happy Nauigation, 2 The obseruation of the Water, which is more shallow to∣wards the East, which giues small hope of a through passage, because all Seas are fed with waters, and for the most part are obserued to be more shallow towards the shore then in the middle: But where in sailing forward, any Sea is found to decrease in depth; it is a likely argument, that it is rather a Creeke Bay or Riuer, then a Straite; Notwithstanding these reasons, some haue heretofore gone about to proue a passage by the North-east to Cathay ; of which opinion was Antony Ienkinson, whose reasons be well answered by S r Humphrey Gilbert, which I briefly touch, adding some things of mine own, as I find occasion. The first reason was drawne from a Relation of Tartarian, who reported that in hunting the Morse he sailed very far towards the South-east, where∣in he found no end; which might giue a likely coniecture, that it was a passage throughout. But to this we may easily answere, that the Tartarians are a barbarous Nation, altoge∣ther ignorant of Nauigation, which neither know the vse of the Charte, Compasse, or Celestiall Obseruations ; & therefore in a wide Sea know not how to distinguish the North-east from the South-east : Besides the curious search of this long passage must depend on better Discoueries then a poore Fi∣sher-man, who seldome dares aduenture himselfe out of sight of land; besides, the Fisher-man iudging by sight, could not see about a kenne at sea, which will proue nothing in regard of so long a distance, The second Reason vrged by M r Ienkinson, was this that there was an Vnicorne's horne found vpon the coasts of Tartaria, which could not come (saith he) by any o∣ther meanes then with the tide in some streight in the North-east in the frozen Sea, there being no Vnicorne in all Asia, sa∣uing in I dia and Cataia. To this reason I may answer with S r Humphrey Gilbert many waies; 1 We may well doubt whether Tartarians knowe a true Vnicornes horne, or no: 2 It is credible, that it could bee driuen so farre by the Tide, being of such a Nature that it cannot swimme. 3 The Tides running to and fro, would haue driuen it as farre backe with the Ebbe, as it brought it forward with the Floud. 4 the Horne which was cast on this coast, might be the Horne of an Asinus Indicu , which hath but one Horne like an Vnicorne in his fore-head, whereof there is great plenty in all the North parts, as in Lappia, Norvegia, Finmarke ▪ as Zeigler testifies in his History of Scandia. 5 Lastly, there is a fish which hath a Horne in his ore-head, c lled the Sea Vnicorne, whereof Mar¦tin Frobisher fo nd one on the coast of Newfound-land ▪ and gaue it to Queene Elizabeth, which was said to be put into her wardrope: But whether it be the same which is at this day to be seene at Winsor Castle, I cannot tell. The third and strongest reason which was vrged for the North-east passage was this: That there was a continuall current through the Frozen Sea, of such swiftnesse, that if any thing were throwne into the water it would presently be caried out of sight. To this we may easily answer, that this strong current is not maintained by any Tide cōming from another Sea, but by diuerse great Riuers falling into this streight : In like sort we find a strong current from Maeotis Palus ; by Pontus Euxinus, Sinus Bosphorus, and along all the coast of Greci (as Conta∣renus and diuerse other affirme out of their own experience) and yet the Sea lyeth not open to any other Sea, but is main∣tained by Tanais and diuerse other riuers: so in this North-east part may this current of water be maintained by the Ri∣uers Du a, Ob, and many others which continually fall in∣to it. Hitherto haue we treated of other passages, either effected or attempted to Cathay and the East Indies. The last and most desired and sought in our time, is that by the North West. This way hath bin often attempted, as by Cabot, Dauis, Frobisher, Hudson, S r Thomas Button and others, but as yet not found out. Neither hath it more troubled the industry of Marriners, then the wit of Schollers, which we shall find by discourses written of that subiect. The absolute decision of this contro∣uersie we must leaue to time: onely such probabilities as I chance to meet with, I will faithfully set down, to giue encou∣ragement to their deseruing labors, who shall farther attempt the search and full discouery of this North-west passage. The Reasons I find vrged, I may well reduce to three Heads: The first is drawne from the testimonies and opinions of ancient Writers▪ The second from the Relations and discoueries of later Nauigators, from the time of Henry the seuenth, till our age: The third and last from the last and newest aduen∣tures of men of our time; either lately dead or liuing. To be∣gin with the first, we shall from the testimony of Plato in Ti∣maeo, as also in his Dialogue call Critias, draw a probable argument: for there he mak s relation of an incomparable great Iland, named Atlantis, of larger extent then Europe and Asia, which was situate Westward from the streights of Gi∣braltar, and nauig ble round abou . The Princes of this Iland (according to Plato's report) heretofore extended their go∣vernment ouer a great part of Europe and Africa. To second which opinion of Plato, we shall reade in Marinus Siou us his History of Spaine, that in the American golden mines, discouered by Columbus, there haue bin found certain pieces of Coine, ingrauen with the Name and Image of Augustus Caes r, which were afterward sent to the Pope by Iohn Rufus, Archbishop of Consentium ; whence a probable coniecture seemes to be grounded, that America in those dayes was both peopled and discouered▪ Now it appeares againe no on∣ly by Plato ▪ but also by the opinion of Mansilius icinus, Crantor, Proclus, and Philo Iudaeus is witnessed in their lear∣ned Commentaries on Plato, that this Iland called Atlantis, some 600 yeares before Plato's time, suffered an extraordinary inundation, & was swallowed vp by water: other like exāples whereof we sh l produce many, hereafter in place cōuenient▪ admitting these testimonies of antiquity, whereof we ought to cherish a reuerend esteem, these consectaries will seeme to of∣fer themselues by way of necessary consequence: 1 That this Iland Atlantis was the same which afterward from A∣mericus Vesputius got the name America: because wee find no Iland in the Atlanticke Ocean which comes neare that greatnesse and quantity assigned by Plato: 2 that this Atlantis or America, in those dayes at least was an Iland, because they reported it to bee Nauigable round about. 3 It must stand with great reason & probability, that this land being an Iland before Plato's time, should be so still, if at least it come not nearer to the nature of an Iland at this day, then before: For either this Relation of the ouerflowing of this land is true or false▪ If at all deserues credit, more reason is, that it should be Nauigable round about then before: insomuch that the Water in this manner swelling high; would sooner fret through and cause a passage, then make a stoppage. 4 This passage must of necessity be toward the North-west where America is diuided from Asia by the streites of A ian, which opinion seemes better warranted, forasmuch as we find it se∣conded by the descriptions of many Geographers of great name and authority, as Gemma Fris us, Munster, Appian, Hun erus, Guicciardine, Michael Tramasi us, Franciscus De∣mongenitus, Bernardus Puteanus, Andreas Vanasor, Tramon∣tanus, Peter Martyr, and Ortelius in his generall Mappe: Who all haue described America as an exact Iland, setting downe all the coasts and countryes on the North-west sea of America from Hoche-laga as farre as Gape Haremantia ; all these learned men hauing with one voice described or repor∣ted America for an Iland ▪ He should shew but a slender e∣steem of Antiquity ▪ or fauour of too much selfe-conceite, who should offer to contradict. This first Argument I confesse spunne out into so many circumstances, seemes at first sight to carry a great shew of truth; but vpon sound examination will be found very defectiue, and vncertaine, carrying more proba∣bility in the conclusion, then the premises da e to iustify: How many Paralogismes and vncertaine grounds are invol∣ved in this reason, let my ingenious reader iudge; 1 whether Plato's report of this Atlantis were a true Relation groun∣ded on experience and obseruation, or a pleasant Fiction deri∣ved from the Poets of that time, wherewith the Grecia Lear∣ning was much infected; 2 How comes it to be thought proba∣ble that Plato in those dayes should be so exact in delineating out the boundes of this New-world, who was so ignorant in the old, as to thinke Europe and Asia to be inferiour in great∣nesse to America, which notwithstanding he thought to be an Iland. 3 How should so famous a King as Atlas, stretching his Monarchie (as the Authors of this reason report) from A∣merica to a great part of Europe and Africk, in that vast gulfe of time▪ slippe away with so slight a mention: That there was such a Prince as Atlas, I make no question; vpon whose fame and greatnesse the Poets grounded that fiction of raising vp the vault of heauen with his shoulders: But whe∣ther this Atlas euer saw America, my reader must giue me leaue to make a doubt, The Ignorance of Nauigation in those times, wherein occasion had not brought to light the chart & compasse, together with the huge vastnesse of the Atlantick O∣cean, will speake my Apologie. 4 The finding of coine graued with the Image and inscription of Augustus Caesar in the American mines, seemes to me more ridiculous then all the rest: We find the acts and conquests of Caesar and Pompey in Europe and Asia, and some parts of Africk particularly set downe by the graue writers of that time: We find Augustus Caesar, for some petty cōquests against barbarous people, em∣blasoned by the Poets of that time to the highest pitch of their inuention▪ we may obserue the age wherein Augustus liued to be the florish and pride of all the Romane learning: and himselfe the Idoll and subiect of most of their Poeticall flatte∣ries; hauing the happinesse to be inuested in the empire, in such a time wherein the Romane Monarchie hauing been too much wounded with a ciuill dissention, was willing to admire her worst Physician: And can any man be so senselesse to ima∣gine that the discouery of the goldē world should passe away clouded in such a flattering age, without any mention? could not so much as the name be registred to teach posterity the way to so rich an Empire? For my owne part I can ascribe this, (if the Historie deserue credit) to nothing else but the pride and imposture of the Spaniards, whom we obserue in all relations to be a most ingratefull Nation, who admiring nothing but their owne greatnesse, haue requited their best deseruing benefactors with disgrace, and obloquie; striuing to raze out their names and memory to whom they owe the greatest glory. Columbus was a Florentine and no S aniard, and therefore must not deserue so much of Spaine as his gol∣den Indies: otherwise Augustus Cesars image had bin better lost then found; and the Bishop receiued small thankes for his Perasitick presentation, 5: That America should euer suffer such a deluge as to be lost for so large a time, will sooner bee admitted as a pleasant discourse in table talke, then purchase credit as a likely History : it seemeth to be doubted by Mer∣cator a great Geographer of latter times▪ inferiour to none before named, whether ouer this tract of lād were ouerwhel∣med with Waters in the generall deluge ▪ which he was indu∣ced to beleeue out of the disparity of the Soile, Herbes, Beasts ▪ and Inhabitants, with ours, in Europe and other parts of the world; This opinion I hold not sound in Diuinity; yet seemes it backt with more strength of humane reason, then Plato's fable of this imaginary Atlantick Iland : Much more could I speake of the vncertainty of this first argument, were I not afraid to tire my Reader too much: But this North-west passage is a long voyage, and hath bin for a long time sought, and therefore I hope ingenious men will pardon my long discourse. 2 The second reason is taken from a Relation reported by Gemma Frisius of three Brothers, who in ancient time passed through this straite into America : which accident gaue it the name of Fretum Trium Fratrum, by which appellation it is knowne at this day. This argument I take to be more weake then the other, as depending on vncertaine report, Indebted I know not to what approued History: But where History is vncertaine, reasonable coniecture must challenge precedency: I will heere by way of doubt aske these few questions; whe∣ther these three Brothers before mentioned passed through this straite or not? If not, no good Argument can hence bee grounded of such a passage: or if they passed through, I de∣maund whether they returned to their Country or not, to make a relation: If they returned not, how could such a re∣port with probability be brought home vnto vs? 3 If they re∣turned home: how could such a memorable Action bee for∣gotten, and not committed to any certaine History ? especially in such a Monkish age, wherein out of ignorance and want of experience, the most petty Inuentions were admired for great matters: The reason as yet makes me to suspend my iudgment of Decision, till I find better. 3 The third reason drawne from antiquity, best vrged and husbanded by S r Humfry Gilbert for this North-west pas∣sage, depends on a certaine Relation of Indians in ancient time cast by tempest on the coasts of Germany, Pliny relates out of a report of Cornelius Nepos, who wrote 57 yeares be∣fore CHRIST, that certaine Indians were inforced by vio∣lence of tempest vpon the Germane coasts, which were after∣ward presented by the King of Sueuia, to Quintus Metellus Celer, then Proconsul of France, wherevpon Pliny inferres in his 2 Booke 66 Chapter, that it is no great wonder, though there be a sea North, where there is so much moisture. To con∣firme this opinion of Pliny, and report of Cornelius Nepos, they produce the testimony of the excellent Geographer Do∣minicus Marius Niger, who sheweth how many wayes the Indian Sea extendeth it selfe, reciting the same report of cer∣taine Indiās that were carryed by tempest through the North-seas from India, vpon the Borders of Germany, as they were following their Trade of Merchandize: The argument groun∣ded vpon these Testimonies will stād thus: These fore-named Indians arriuing on the coasts of Germany, must come of ne∣cessity either by the South-east, South-west; North-east or North-west. The three other coasts seeme altogether impro∣bable, and therefore this opinion of the North-west seemes more worthy credit; first, they came not by the South-east ; because the roughnesse of the Seas, occasioned by stormie windes, and strange currents in those places about Cape bona Speranza, seconded by the smallnesse of their Canoas, wherein the Indians vsually trauailed, seem to stand against su h a long voyage: 2 They could not well come a long by the shore of Africk and so passe into Europe, because the windes doe there commonly blow Easterly off from the shore; so that the cur∣ren dri ing that way would sooner haue carried them We∣sterly vpon some part of America, where they should by all likely coniecture, haue perished in that great Atlanticke Sea, either in that huge and great Atlanticke Sea either by ship∣wracke, or want of prouision in so small a vessell. 3 If they had ouercome all these dangers which wise men would hardly take vp vpon trust: It seemes hard they should not haue first touched vpon the coasts of the Azores, Portugall, Spaine England or Ireland, before they should arriue at the coasts of Germany. 4 For the reason before-named they could not come from the South-west, because the current which commeth from the East, striketh with such violence on the straites of Magellane, running with such swiftnesse into the South-sea, or Mare del Zur, that a shippe without great burden cannot without much difficulty arriue at our Western Ocean, through that narrow rea: What then shall we imagine of an Indian Canoa managed by such vnskilfull marriners? 5. To proue these men to be true Indians, and neither Africans nor Americans, seemes to be warranted; because the Inhabitants of Africa & America neither had, nor scarce know other kind of Boates then such as beare neither mastes, nor sailes ; but such as are are only carried along by the shores: except of later times such as haue bin instructed by the Turkes on the coasts of Barbarie, or by the Spaniards in America : This argument I confesse is wittily spunne out by my renowned country-man S r Humfry Gilbert, whose ability seemes to haue made a har∣uest out of the stubble. Neuerthelesse in my conceipt it pro∣miseth in the conclusion more then the premises can well warrant: For first it seemes not to me a matter so cleare out of question whether these ship-wrackt people cast in vpon the coasts of Germany were true Indians, or not; because so farre as my coniecture leadeth me, being grounded on Historie, the name of Indians out of the ignorance of those times hath been giuen by the Romans to many other forraigne Nations farre distant; especially to the Aeth opiās in Africk which be∣side the testimony of diuerse ancient Historians, too tedious to relate, may seeme probable out of that end of a verse of Horace▪ Vltra Garamantas & Indos: where for ioyning toge∣ther two Nations so separat in place, the former being in Africk, the other almost in the farthest verge of Asia, he seem∣ed as ignorāt of the distance, as the people: 2 How should these Westerne inhabitants know these men to be true Indians, whose condition, place and language they neuer vnderstood? 3 Why might not these men come from some of the Ilands in the Atlantick Ocean? 4 The reason against it, drawne from the current striking with such force on the streits of Magellane, is contradicted by the experience of latter Nauigators▪ much more I could speake of this reason; but that I hold it better to cherish a hope of such a passage▪ then by excepting against these ancient arguments to discourage moderne industrie. Other probabilities may seeme to be drawne from the dis∣coueries of later Nauigatours since the raigne of Henry the se∣uenth, vnder whose protection Sebastian Cabot vndertook the discouery of the North-West costs: In which he preuailed as much as the Alchimists, who in seeking out the Philosophers stone haue often mist of their aime: yet by this meanes inuen∣ted many rare and excellent secrets, of vse, and admiration. That Cabot the same yeere discouered as much of the Nor∣therne parts of America as Columbus of the Southerne, out of my small reading seemes to mee no great question, whence I cannot imagine that King Philip of Spaine can in this New-found-world challenge a greater interest then King Charles of great Brittaine : a Prince of those incomparable vertues, which may be thought worthier to owne, then the others to pretend to so great a Soueraignty: For the latter voyages & discoueries of Dauis & Frobisher (for ought I see) they promise scarce so much as Hope, which oftentimes flatters and deceiues men with her best countenance. But if wee take vp wares vpon trust, some will tell vs of a Portugall, who made a voyage through this Streit Northward, calling a Promontory with∣in the same after his name Promontorium Corterialis ; of Scol∣mus a Dane, who passed a great part thereof: but the most probable in my coniecture, is that which S r Humfrey Gilbert reports of one Saluaterra a Gentleman of Victoria in Spaine, who was said to haue passed by chance out of the West Indies into Ireland, in the yeere of our Lord 1568, who constantly auerred the North-west passage from vs to Cathay to bee thought nauigable; and farther related in the presence of S r Henry Sidney, then Lord Deputy of Ireland ( S r Humfrey Gil∣bert being then present) that a Frier of Mexico called Andrew Vrdanetta, more then eight yeeres before his arriuall, told him that they came from Mare Del Zur, through this Northwest straite into Germany, and shewed Saluaterra (being with him at that time in Mexico ) a Sea-Chart, made out of his owne obseruation in that voyage, wherein such a passage was ex∣pressed, agreeing with Ortelius his Mappe: moreouer this Frier told the King of Portugall in his returne by that country home-ward, that hauing found such a North-west passage, hee meant shortly to make the same publicke, but the King ear∣nestly intreated him not to discouer this secret to any Nation: for that (said he) if England had knowledge and experience of it, it would greatly hinder the King of Spaine and me. This re∣lation I could willingly credit from the mouth of any other man then a Frier; of whose palpable lyes, and fabulous inuen∣tions in their flattering letters to the Pope, from both the In∣dies, we haue sufficient experience. Neuerthelesse that future ages might not despaire of so worthy an attempt as the disco∣uery of this passage, it hath pleased God to stirre vp the Spi∣rits and industry of two later Nauigatours, Hudson and S r Thomas Button, who haue reuiued the forlorne hopes of the former. For the particulars of whose discoueries I know not better where to referre my Reader, then to a curious Mappe not long since set out by our worthy and learned Professour M r Brigges: the arguments I collect from thence are these, ex∣pressed in his own words; 1 In the bottome of Hudson Bay, where he wintred, the hight of the Tide was but two foot, whereas by the neerenesse of the South sea in Port Nelson, it was constantly 15 foot or more. 2 Moreouer in Port Nelson, where S r Thomas Button did winter, in 57 degrees he found the Tide constantly, euery twelue houres, to rise 15 foot or more: and that a West wind made the Nepe Tides equall with the Spring Tides ; and the Summer following, about the lati∣tude of 60 degrees hee found a strong race a Tide running sometimes Eastward, sometimes Westward. 3 To shew the land towards the South-sea, through which we seeke to open this passage, not to bee so far off as our ordinary Charts seene to pretend, may be probably auerred, in that California here∣tofore supposed to be a part of the Westerne Continent, is since by a Spanish Chart taken by the Hollandors, found to bee a great Iland ; the length of the West shore being about 500 leagues from Cape Mendocin to the South Cape thereof, called Cape S. Lucas ; which may appeare both by the Spanish Charts, and by the report of Francis Gaule, whereas in the or∣dinary Charts it is expressed to be 1700 leagues. These Argu∣ments. I confesse, haue swayde my opinion, but not as yet ab∣solutely freed me from doubt. Three Quaeries I must leaue for the learned to consider, and for the time to decide; 1 whether this relation of Mariners concerning the Bay of S r Thomas Button and Hudson be true or no? no man will (I suppose) censure me as vnmannerly for asking such a question, consi∣dering how much many Nauigatours, either by their mistakes or their industrious falsities haue deceiued mens credulities; the one is incident to mankind, which out of vncertaine obser∣uations, or vnnecessary deductions, from thence often drawes an ill consequence; The other, the ordinary policy of disco∣uerers, who lest their Trauailes might bee thought fruitlesse, would at least promise hope in the reuersion. How many rela∣tions haue been corrected by experience of later Nauigatours, euery one may iudge. 2 Whether this strong Tide in Hud∣sons Bay comming from the West, were from the South-Sea, or from the North, betwixt the Continent and diuerse Ilands by an Inlet, is not a matter as yet cleerely out of doubt. Terra Del Fuogo was heretofore supposed to bee a Continent, till Schouten in his discouery found it to bee an Iland, and a large Sea beyond it toward the South. Likewise New-found-land in all our former Mappes and Globes, expressed as a part of the Maine of America, is by later experience found to be an Iland: and why may not this happen in the other, that at the entrance into Hudsons Bay, the land on the right hand should be clouen into many Ilands ; betwixt which the waters issuing, should be turned in such sort, as it might seeme to proceede from the West: sith the Tides taking their beginning from the Maine Sea, and continued through some Straite, commonly follow the crooked windings of the Channell. 3 That Cali∣fornia is an Iland, it may (for ought I know) be well warran∣ted: But the euidence drawne from the Spanish Chart, seemes rather to cherish hope, then perswade consent. In this which I haue spoken of these worthy mens coniectures, I haue rather expressed my doubts, then my opinion; esteeming notwith∣standing that doubt almost & Heresy, which should discourage any generous and deseruing spirit from a farther attempt of this North-west-Passage. CHAP. VIII. Of Sea-Trafficke and Merchandize. 1 O F the Internall Affections of the Sea wee haue spoken: It remaines now that we treate of the Exter∣nall: By the Externall I vnder∣stand that which belongs to Sea-Trafficke, or Nauigation. 2 Sea-Trafficke is a passage by Sea from one Countrey to another. It is not my purpose in this place exactly to set downe the Art of Nauigation ; being a matter requiring a speciall▪ Trea∣tise of it selfe: yet because shipping and Nauigation, as Exter∣nall or adiacent Accidents, belong to the Sea as the proper subiect; I could not altogether slip them ouer without some mention: In handling of which matter I onely propose to my selfe two things: first, the Author and efficient causes of Sea∣uoyages or Nauigation; Secondly, the End and Vses thereof: both which wee will knit vp in these two generall Theo∣remes. 1 Nauigation first taught by Almighty God, was afterward seconded by the industry of famous Men in all ages. The first inuention of this excellent art we can ascribe to no other author then God himselfe, who first taught the Hebrewes his chosen people, and not the Egyptians and Phenicians, as some haue falsly imagined: For wee read in Genesis that Noah according to Gods precept, made an Arke for the preseruati∣on of himselfe and other liuing creatures from the deluge: be∣fore which wee cannot learne that there was extant any skill of Nauigation: Of which wee haue many reasons and conie∣ctures giuen by ancient writers. 1 Because in those times there was greater need of Citties then shipps; because citties are not made for shipps, but rather shipps, for the vse of cit∣ties. 2 Small or little commodity could in those times be rea∣ped from other Countreyes, lying as yet rude and vnpossessed without Inhabitants. 3 Some would haue this to be a reason why God reuealed not this art to the old worldlings: because being ready to perish in the floud, no man might haue meanes to escape or saue himselfe, which without doubt they would haue attempted, had the Art of Nauigation beene knowne a∣mongst them. Whence it is a probable coniecture, that this knowledge of Nauigation was discouered first to Noah at the time of the Deluge whose Arke resting afterwards on the mountaines of Ararat, gaue a president to other Nations neere bordering, in what manner shipps were to be framed. Whence it came to passe that the first to whom this skill was deriued next to the Hebrewes were the Tyrians and Phaenicians, Na∣tions as well for the commodity of the place as Inclination to such businesse more accommodated to Nauigation: For Tyre was a chiefe Mart-towne of Phaenicia bordering vpon the sea. Which knowledge being deriued from them to other Nati∣tions gaue occasion to Stratus and Strabo to coniecture that they were the first Inuentours of it, being not able through the want of holy writ to ascend higher. From the Phae∣nicians was this knowledge deriued to the Aegyptians, as Pliny reports in his 7 Booke and 56 Chapter, when as yet this Art was but rude and altogether vnpolished, as may ap∣peare by the same Pliny ; who testifies that they then began to saile in a certaine vessell called Ratis : which word how∣soeuer it now bee taken generally for any ship, was origi∣nally interpreted to be made of Beames ioyned together: In which kind of ship they are reported to haue passed the Me∣diterranian sea, but especially the Red-sea, being set out by King Erithra. Then came this art from the Egyptians to the Grecians (according to Pliny by Danaus ) who perfected this cience, and made a ship in a more exact forme then hee had learned amongst the Phenicians ▪ whence Danaus was cele∣brated the first Author of this inuention: it being a common er∣rour amongst all Nations to ascribe the first inuention to him, who was the first discouerer of it to them, being able to deriue it no f rther: Yet the Grecians being very full of fabulous in∣u ntions haue found out other Authors of this art; for Strabo in his 10 booke, giues it to Min s: others, as Diodorus Si u∣lus in his 6 booke, to Neptune ; who is of opinion, that for this cause he was afterward translated into the number of the Gods. But this is certaine that amongst all the Grecians the Cretensi∣ans were the first that excelled in this faculty. Whence grew that Prouerbe: Cretensis nescit Pelagus : as who should say no∣thing could be imagined more absurd and ridiculous then that a man should be borne in Creet and haue no skill in Nauigation: Others ascribe the first knowledge of making ships to Daeda∣lus, a rare workman in mechanicall occupations: From the Grecians afterwards was this trade communicated to the Ita∣lians, amongst whom the Geneuensians and Venetians most ex∣celled. Of the Venetians skill in this matter, we read no other argument then their great riches & magnificent power, espe∣cially by the sea, which hath continued vnto this day: whereof no other cause can be thought on, next vnto Gods prouidence, then their industrie in Sea-voyages. After these arose the Por∣tugalls who vnder the conduct and direction of Columbus an Italian, discouered America called the new-world, and gaue example and excitement to many other Nations to aduenture farther. Amongst which (by the testimony of out-landish people) no Nation hath waded farther then the English, who vnder Drake and Candish haue compassed about the world and left an eternall Trophie of their immortall fame vnto po∣sterity. Yet can wee not here defraud the Low-country men of their due commendation, especially the Hollanders, Flem∣mings, and Sealanders : who by their riches acquired by nauiga∣tion and extraordinary power at Sea, haue kept in despight of the vsurping Spaniard these Prouinces, farre richer then at the beginning of their warres, and deserued that saying which was giuen to one of the Grecians citties, by the Oracle; Tha it was guarded not with stones, but with wooden walls. Thus much may suffice for the Authours and first Inuentours of Na∣uigation. Wee are now to speake something of the ends and vses of it, which may in generall bee referred either to profit or pleasure: Both which are againe spread into many Bran∣ches; the most of which wee shall comprize in this following Theoreme. 2 Nauigation is very necessary as well for the encrease of Knowledge as Riches. Necessity is vsually taken two wayes; either for an absolute need, without the which a thing cannot bee: or Compara∣tiuely for a conueniency, without the which a thing cannot well bee: In both senses I may call Nauigation necessary for a mans life: for to deferre the later, whereof lesse doubt is made; it is certaine that many places are so poore, barren, and indigent of all succour and reliefe, that they cannot maintaine a populous Nation without forraigne commerce and trafficke; especially in these dayes, where the multitude of men is in∣creased to so great abundance: for the later, many arguments may bee produced to proue the conueniency of Nauigation, which no man of any iudicious insight can deny to bee most strong and forcible. The first argument may bee drawne from the Authours and Inuentours of it, whereof wee haue spoken in the former proposition: for first (as wee haue shewed) it was prescribed by God himselfe, who neuer taught mankind any thing idle or vnnecessary. It was embraced and cheri∣shed by many Nations euen till this day, which no doubt had long since beene lost, had not vse and profit seconded the Inuention. Neither is it probable that Almighty God should create that vaste Masse of Water▪ that it should bee an Element for fishes to liue onely, or that (as some guesse) it should somewhat mitigate the extremity and drouth of the Sunnes heat ▪ But that men should by this meanes haue an ea∣sie and ready way to communicate and a ficke one with the other; which may appeare as well by many Testimonies out of the sacred Scripture▪ namely Psal. 104 vers. 25. Es 26. ver. 1▪ 2. as also by the example of King Salomon, the wisest of all Kings, who by this meanes got great store of gold from O∣phir to build the Temple, as will appeare in 1 Kings and the 9 Chapter. The second reason therefore may bee drawne from the exercise of Merchandize, and t ansportation of commodi∣ties, which cannot bee administred without Sea-voyages: first because greater store of Merchandize may be carried in a ship then in a Cart, Waggon, or any other Instrument ordinarily in vse. Secondly, because in ships greater variety of wares may bee brought from diuerse places, to which a Waggon cannot without great difficulty approach, or not at all. Thirdly, be∣cause wares and such commodities cannot so quickly bee con∣uayed in the land from places farre distant, as on the sea: nor with so little cost and charges. The commodities conuayed from one Countrey to another are chiefely three; stuffes and other matters necessary for apparell, victuals and food, Phy∣sicall Druggs▪ all which no man will deny to be most profita∣ble for the vse of mankind. Moreouer it is not to bee imagined that nature produceth such commodities onely for the priuat behoofe of some one country wherin they grow: First, because such commodities in some countries are found in such abun∣dance, that the same place seemes not to need them: And na∣ture were vaine, if the vse were not required. India mittit E∣bur, molles sua thura Sabai. Secondly, because other Nations altogether want such things which abound in other coun∣treyes: without the which not withstanding they cannot well liue. A fourth reason may bee drawne from the promotion of Religion & sciences, which cannot well be atcheiued without Sea-voyages or Nauigation. For the former wee need goe no farther then the holy Scripture which giues large testimony of such voyages: In the old Testament as well as in the new, we haue recommended to all posterity the industrie of the Queen of Saba, who is said to haue come from the vttermost parts of the Earth to heare the wisdome of Salomon : And how should the Gospell of Christ haue beene di ulged to diuerse Nations, had not the Apostles dispersed themselues, and passed the Sea in ships, to conuay their sacred message to diuerse Nations and Kingdomes? neither is it lesse euident in the propagation of Learning and humane Sciences: First, out of the example of many and famous worthy Philosophers, who trauailed far to conuerse with learned men of other Nations, to enrich their mindes with knowledge. Secondly, out of the first propaga∣tion of Learning into our parts; which wee shall finde (as it were) foot by foot to follow Nauigation. Hence wee see that from the Hebrewes and Chaldees it was deriued to the Tyri∣ans ; from them to the Egyptians ▪ so to the Romans, and thence to most parts of Europe. A fourth reason may bee taken from the necessity of transporting Colonies into forraine countryes: for as after the vniuersall Deluge of the world▪ the people dayly encreasing, were enforced in tract of time to disperse themselues into diuerse Countreyes: so euery Countrey left to it selfe, and not much molested with famine, or deuoured by warres, will at length grow too populous▪ vnable to sustaine its owne weight, and relieue its owne Inhabitants. Whence it hath been a policy practised by most Kings & States in such eases, to make forrayne expeditions, and send forth Colonies into other Countreyes lesse peopled, to disburden their owne of such encombrances: as we see the Kings of Spaine to haue sent many into the West-Indies ; and we at this day discharge many Idlers into Virginia and the Barmudas. Here al o is the Art of Nauigation vsefull, without which, the Seas could not be passed, nor forraine Countreyes knowne. Fiftly, Naui∣gation seemes to bee of greater importance for the defence of a Countrey against forraine Nations; because Sea-fights are lesse dangerous and inconuenient to the Land, then Land-fights. All these arguments haue their force and life to proue the profit of this excellent Science. Many arguments may bee drawne to proue the vse of it for pleasure and delectation; which being well vsed, hath his place amongst other of Gods especiall blessings. This delight will first shew it selfe in the mutuall commerce and society with other Nations: Sith a man (as Aristotle affirmes) is by nature inclined to mutuall society, and cannot reape greater pleasure then in such con∣iunctions: And as one Man with another findes solace; so one Nation with another: especially in the variety of sundry man∣ners, customes, rites, and dispositions. Secondly, in the con∣templation of wise Nature, who hath endowed diuerse coun∣treyes with diuers Minerals, Plants, Beasts, and such commo∣dities; then which variety nothing can be more delectable to an ingenious vnderstanding. To all which we may add as a Co∣rollary, the Honour which hath been giuen to Nauigation by Princes and States, as well of former as later yeeres. In ancient times wee read that Ptolomy Philadelphus, that learned King of Egypt, who furnished himselfe with so rich a Library 277 yeeres before Christs Incarnation, gaue great incouragement to Nauigation, and maintained the passage through Sinus A∣rabicus, or the Red-Sea, by which the commodities of India and Arabia were brought to Alexandria, and from thence dispersed through diuerse places of Europe, Asia, and Africa. This was afterward seconded and cherished by the Romans, at which time Egypt was made subiect to their dominion: But the Roman Empire being afterwards rent in pieces by the Gothes, Vandals, Lumbards, and Saracens, all trafficke be∣twixt nations began a while to cease; till such time as the in∣conuenience being knowne, a new Mart was set vp at Ca∣pha in Taurica Chersonesus, belonging at that time to the Ge∣nois: Thence was it deriued to Trebizond, and afterwards to Samerchand, where the Indian, Turkish, & Persian Merchants were wont to trade with the Venetians. This Art was after∣wards set vp and reuiued by the Sultans of Egypt, through the passage of the Red-Sea, till such time as it was in a manner taken away by the Portugals, Spaniards, English, and Dutch ; who haue found out for themselues a better way by the Cape of good Hope, to the East Indies, and by this meanes much a∣bated the Trafficke of Alexandria, and the wealth of the Ve∣netians. Neither in this Age of ours haue there wanted great Potentates, who haue not onely endowed this Trade with great and ample priuiledges; but also themselues practised such commerce, as well for the benefit of their Common-wealth, as the increase of their particular estate. Two memo∣rable examples we haue in Henry the third, King of England, and Laurence de Medices Duke of Florence, whereof the for∣mer gaue many and large priuiledges to all the Hance Townes in his Kingdomes, which were in Number about 27: The o∣ther himselfe for his owne priuate commodity exercised the Trade of Merchandize: yet was this man most ingenious, and a great louer of learned Men. CHAP. IX. Of Pedography, Riuers, Lakes, and Fountaines in the Earth. 1 W E haue formerly treated of Hy∣drographie, or the description of the Water; now are we (by Gods as∣sistance) to proceede on to Pedographie, which is a description of the Firme Earth, or Dry-Land. 2 The Land is a space contained in the super∣ficies of Earth, distinguished from the Water. The Earth in this place is not taken as in the former part of Geographie for the whole Terrestriall Spheare, composed of Earth and Water: Neither yet as it is vsually taken in Naturall Philosophy for an Absolute Elementary body, whose causes and affections are to bee searched out; but Topographically for a place or habitable space on the dry-land ; This dry-land distin∣guished from the Water by its Firmenesse and Constancy, be∣ing no subiect as the Water to motion and inconstancy, was therefore (if we belieue the Poet) called Vest , according to that verse, Stat viterra suâ, vi stando Vesta vocatur. Neither wants this fable of Vesta a sufficient morall. First, because Vesta was faigned to bee a keeper and protectour of their houses, which may very well agree to the Earth: which not only su∣staines and beares vp all buildings and houses; but also affords all commodities and fruits wherewith housholds are maintai∣ned. Secondly, Vesta was fained to be the Goddesse to whom the first fruits were offered in sacrifice: which may well square with the nature of the Earth, from which all fruits are origi∣nally deriued; and therefore (as it were of due) ought all first fruits to bee consecrated to her altar. Two other Parallels be∣twixt the Goddesse Vesta are added by Natalis Comes: First, because Plutarch sheweth in his Symposiacks, that the Tables of the Ancients, dedicated to Vesta, were made round in forme and fashion of the Earth: Secondly, because the seat of Vesta was imagined to bee in the liquid Aire immoueable, and not subiect to motion: which well agrees with the common con∣ceiued opinion of the Earth. But these two rather expresse the nature of the whole Terrestriall Spheare, then of the land di∣uided from the Waters: This description of the dry-land sepa∣rated from the Waters, we haue termed Pedographie because the Greeke , commonly deriued from , a foote, signi∣fies as much as a firme place, whereon men may haue sure footing, to which is consonant the Hebrew word , which seemes most probably deriued from , which signifies as much as Terere, to weare out or waste: because the Earth is dayly troden and worne with our feet. The proprieties of the Earth appertaining to a Cosmographer, are many and various; wherefore to auoid confusion; wee haue diuided them into these heads. 3 The Adiuncts of a Place in the Land are either Naturall or Ciuill ▪ The Naturall are such as are in bred in the Earth. 4 The Naturall may bee againe diuided into Perpetuall, or Casuall. Perpetuall are such as alwayes, or most ordinarily continue the same. 5 The Perpetuall proprieties are againe two∣fold▪ either Absolute, or Comparatiue. The Absolute I call such as agree to the Land without any respect to the Sea. 6 Of the former sort are such as belong to the Figurature of the Soile, wherin three things are most remarkeable: 1 Riuers, Fountaines, and Lakes. 2 Mountaines, Valleyes, and plaines. 3 Woods, and Cham∣pian Countreyes. 7 A Riuer is a perpetuall course of water from a certaine head or fountaine running from an higher to a lower place on the earth. Riuers are by some Geographers more curiously distingui∣shed into 2 sorts: whereof the first are setled or stayed Ri∣uers, which slide away with a more equall and vniforme course: The later are called Torrents or stickle waters, which are carried with a far greater violence. In a Riuer three things are chiefly remarkeable▪ First the Fountaine or Spring secondly Whirle-pooles ▪ Thirdly the Mouth of it. The spring is the place, where at first the water sensibly breakes out of the Earth: As Nilus in Africke is thought to haue his first head at the mountaines of the Moone. A Whirlepoole is a place in a Ri∣uer, where the water falling into a Deep trench, is whirled & teurned round▪ The Mouth is the place where any Riuer finds a passage our, either into the sea or into another greater Riuer; which in latine is tearmed ostium or a gate: Whence they call Septem ostia Nili: which are seuen mouths, by which it fals in∣to the Mediterranean. This gaue the name to many Citties and Townes in England as Plimmouth, Dar mouth, Portsmouth, Axmouth, with many others. Now for as much as all water is by nature heauy, and therefore couets the lowest place; The course of all Riuers must needes bee from a higher to a lower place: whence we may guesse the hight of lands. For it is ne∣cessary that for euery mile wherein the water glides forward on the earth, there be made an allowance of 2 foote at least in the decliuity of the ground. For although water will slide a∣way at any inequality, yet could not the water bee whole∣some, and retaine any reasonable swiftnesse of motion with∣out this allowance. Hence we may probably find out the huge hight of the Alpes about all the places in Europe: because out of them spring foure great Riuers, which runne foure wayes; whereof the two greatest are the Danow (which receiues in∣to it 60 Nauigable riuers and so disburthens it selfe into the Euxine Sea far remote) and the Rhene. Of Lakes and Riuers many memorable matters may be spoken: all which we will reduce to these heads. 1 Their Generation and first originall: 2 Their Appearance: 3 Their Place in the earth: 4 Their Vertues and effects; all which we will comprehend in these Theoremes following. 1 All Riuers haue their first originall from the sea the mother of Riuers. The originall of fountaines and Riuers on the earth is a matter of great difficulty, and for ought I know, not yet found out of our greatest Philosophers ; yet being willing to goe as farre as I can, I will glaunce at probabilities, and first set downe other mens opinions. Some haue beene of opinion that in the bowels of the earth are hid certaine vast concauities and cauernes, which receiuing into them a great quantity of raine-Water, haue giuen originall to Lakes and Fountaines. Hence they giue the reason why these fountaines are perpe∣tuall; Because the raine-water receiued into these cauernes being extraordinary great, is sufficient to nourish such springs of water vntill the next winter; whence comes a new supply of more raine. These Riuers (say they) in the summer de∣crease, and sometime are dry, because of the defect of w ter, when the place is not great enough to receiue sufficient water for the whole yeere. This opinion seemeth grounded on these reasons: First, because wee find by experience, that Riuers and fount ines are greater and larger in Summer then in Win∣ter. Secondly, because where there is lesse Raine, fewer or no Riuers are seene▪ As in the Desarts of Ethiopia and Africke few or no Riuers are found: But in Germany, France, Brittany, and Italy many Riuers shew themselues▪ because they abound in the moisture of the Aire and much fall of Raine. Thirdly, a∣mongst vs (wee see by experience) in a hot and dry Summer they are much decreased from their ordinary greatnesse, or al∣together dryed vp; which is a great probability that their ori∣ginall is from raine. This opinion if it bee onely vnderstood of some Riuers, may be probable; because some currents out of doubt take their originall from great showers or snowes, as at the foot of the Alpes and other such places, where the snow daily melts and feeds them: but if it be generally vnderstood of all Riuers, it is manifestly false as may appeare by these rea∣sons. First, because the Earth no where drinkes vp the raine farther then ten foot deep in the soile; for the higher superfi∣cies of the earth is either dry and so easily drinkes vp and con∣sumes the Water within that space; or else being already moist, it receiues it not at all, but expells it by Riuers and channells: Secondly, some mountaines not couered with earth, but consisting of hard rocke, notwithstanding send forth great store of springs and fountaines, which water could not bee receiued in, through a hard rocky substance. Thirdly, be∣cause in very dry places certaine pits being digged downe in∣to the ground 2 hundred or three hundred foot deep, will dis∣couer many great streames of Water, which could not be from the receite of Raine. Fourthly, it cannot be imagined that so much raine could in a winter fall into one place, besides that which the drouth of the earth consumes, to nourish so mighty and great Riuers in the Earth, as are Riuers running in a per∣petuall course. Fiftly, all Riuers almost take their originall from some mountaines or other; as Danubius from the Alpes, and Nilus from the mountaines of the Moone in Africke ; Which places being extraordinary high, are more vnapt to re∣ceiue water, then lower places of the earth. To the reasons that they alleadge for their opinions, it is not hard to answer▪ That riuers should be greater in winter th in the summer, the cause may be better giuen, Because more moisture of the Aire falls into the brinke from externall R ine or snow in winter then in summer; and the ground being moister, is able to drinke lesse then at other times: which is also the reason why in hot∣ter and dry Countreyes there is not such plenty of Riuers▪ for we deny not, but fountaines may sometimes be increased and sometimes diminished by addition of raine-water but that a∣ny such vast con auity should be vnder ground, as the recepta∣cle of so much raine, and should nourish so many and so great currents. The second opinion is of those who thinke that the originall of all riuers and fountaines is from the Sea: Which conceit hath beene strongly fortified by many Fathers of the Church, and graue Diuines of later time; which opinion is chiefly grounded vpon these reasons: First because it seemes a most incredible matter, that so much vaporous matter should be engendred vnder the earth, to feed such a perpetuall course of water: Secondly, if all Riuers should not be deriued from the sea, no reason could bee giuen, why so many riuers dayly emptying themselues into the sea, the sea should not en∣crease, but continue in the same quantity. Thirdly, to this purpose they vrge the place of Eccles. 1. All riuers runne in∣to the sea, and yet the sea is not full: To the place whence they came they returne, that they may flow againe. But this opini∣on seemes to bee shaken with a great difficulty. For it is a hard matter to conceiue how the water of the sea being by nature heauy, & lower then the superficies of the earth (as we haue demonstrated) should ascend into high mountaines; out of which we find springs of water oftentimes to arise: for ei∣ther it must ascend Naturally or by Violence : not naturally for the foresaid cause; because it is a heauy body: If violently, they must assigne some externall Agent, which enforceth it to this violence. This difficulty diuerse Authors haue laboured diuerse waies to salue: Some amongst whom the chiefe was Theoderet ▪ haue fled to a supernaturall cause in Gods provi∣dence; as though the water in it's own nature heauy, should be notwithstanding enforced to the topps of the mountaines; But this opinion seemes very improbable; because, although we cannot deny Gods miraculous and extraordinary wor∣king in some things; yet all men haue supposed this to be con∣fin'd within the bounds of nature: And very strange it were to imagine that almighty God in the first institution of nature should impose a perpetuall violence vpon nature. Others, as Basill, haue thought that the sea-water was driuen vpwards towards the tops of mountaines by reason of certaine sp rits enclosed in it: Mare (as he saith) fluitans & permeans per cuni∣culos fistularet & angustos, ox vbi obliquis aut certe recta in sublime surrectis excursibus se occupatum deprehenderit ab agi∣tante compulsum spiritu, superficie terr vi disrupta erumpit at{que} for as emicat ; The same opinion almost in euery respect is ascribed to Plato in Phedone, and Pliny 2 booke .65 chap. Quo (inquit) spiritu, actu & terr pondere expressa siphonum modo e∣ cat, tant {que} a periculo decidendi abest vt in summa quo{que} et tissima exiliat: Qua ratione manifestum est, quare tot f u i∣num quotidi n accessu maria non crescant. But this exposition will hardly satisfy him who desires to search farther then obscurity of words: For first by admitting spirits as mouers of the waters, they seeme to fall into a Platonick opinion be∣fore examined of vs concerning the heat of the sea-water. Se∣condly, I would demaund whether such spirits in the water to which they ascribe this motion, be Naturall Agents or Su∣pernaturall, or Violent ; They cannot be naturall Agents: For asmuch as they are supposed to driue and enforce the water against his owne nature. For by nature (as all men know) it is apt to descend; whereas here it is supposed to ascend by rea∣son of such spirits. They cannot bee violent agents because they bee perpetuall; whereas no violent thing can be perpe∣tuall. Thomas Aquinas being desirous to shew, how much fountaines could ascend out of the sea-water varies in opinion from the former, and imagines that the fountaines and Riuer-water is drawne vpwards through the force of Celestiall bo∣dies, for the common good; to wit that it might water aswell the mettalls in the bowells of the earth, as giue moisture and nourishment to Plants, and liuing creatures, dwelling there∣on. And this motion (saith he) although it be against the par∣ticular nature of the water, is not altogether violent: because elementary bodyes are bound by a certaine law to obey and subiect themselues to the heauenly; so that motions impressed by them, are not enforced on them by violence. For albeit in some sort it thwart the phisicall disposition: yet haue all crea∣tures an ob dientiall aptnesse (as they terme it) to submit them∣selues to the superiour. But this opinion of Thomas Aquinas (in my conceit) seemes lesse sound then the former: For first Thomas had no need at all of these shifts, holding some of his other grounds: For in another place, comparing the hight of the s a and land one with the other, he firmely maintaines that▪ the sea is aboue the land, and that it is bounded and restrayned from ouerflowing the dry land, by the immediate power of the Creator: If this be graunted, what need there any ascent or drawing vp of the water, by any externall power of the heauenly bodyes: sith the remitting of this restraint of water in some places, were sufficient to cause such springs and riuers in the earth: Secondly, his opinion cannot stand without ma∣nifest contradiction of himselfe; for how can the water, being of his owne nature heauy, be drawne vpward without vio∣lence and thwarting of nature. And whereas he alleadges for himselfe an obedientiall aptnesse in the elementary bodies to obey the superiour, he shall find very little helpe to maintaine his part. For this obedientiall inclination must be either accor∣ding to the nature of the water, or opposite vnto it, or at least the one must be sudordinate vnto the other: That it is ac∣cording to the nature of the water, he himselfe disclaimes and experience refutes; because it naturally descends, not ascends: if it be opposite (as indeed it must needes be) he contradicts himselfe: If the Physicall and obedientiall inclination be subor∣dinate the one to the other; I vrge, that subordinate causes can produce no other then subordinate effects; for asmuch as the causes and the effects are measured and proportioned the one by the other. But wee plainly see that the motions of as∣cent or descent are diametrally opposed, and contrary the one to the other; so that they cannot otherwise proceed, then from opposite and contrary causes. Secondly this obedien∣tiall aptnesse, is commonly vnderstood of a creature, in respect of his Creator, in whose hand it is, as to create all things of no∣thing, so to reduce all things againe into nothing. But this al∣though it be aboue nature, yet no way contradicts nature: and easier it is to be imagined, that the Creator should annihilate a∣ny Creature, then letting it remaine in his own Nature, giue it a motion against nature: Moreouer we duly cōsider nature in her course, we shall find that the lower & elementall Bodies onely concurre to the conseruation of the whole, and of one a∣nother, by following their own priuate inclination: for the whole is nothing else then an orderly concent and harmony of all the parts; from whose mutuall cooperation, it receiues his perfection; so that where any part failes in his owne office, the whole must needs sustain dammage. Thirdly, it will hardly be resolued by any of this opinion, by what meanes or instru∣ments the heauenly or superiour Bodies can haue such an o∣peratiue power ouer the water, as to lift it vpward from his owne Center: for neither can this thing be performed by mo∣tion, hight, or any Influēce, which are the three meanes of ope∣ration of celestiall Bodies on elementary: I will not stand to proue every particular in this matter: But onely would haue my aduersary to answere, and giue an instance and speciality. Another opinion there is of Aristotle, followed by all Peripa∣ eticks, who in his first booke of Meteors, and 13 Chapter, goes about to proue and maintaine, that all Springs and Wells in the land are produced and generated in the bowells of the Earth by any vapours resolued into water: which opini∣on he labours o strengthen in this manner. It is certain (saith he) that the Earth hath within it much aire; because Nature will no-where admit a vacuity. But the Earth hath not onely many open, but a great many secret holes and con auities which cannot otherwise be filled then with aire. Moreouer a great part of the Earth, and other vapours therein contained, and stirred vp by the force of the Starres, are conuerted into Aire; and that aswell the Aire included in the bowells of the Earth, as vapours there also bred, are perpetually conuerted into water: This reason may seeme to perswade, because it fol∣lowes of necessity, that the coldnesse of the Earth expelling their heat, they should harden & condensate, & be disposed at last to the generation of water: whence also the cause giuen of the generation of water in the middle Region of the Aire, although it be not alwaies thence bred: aswell for other cau∣ses, as for that the Aire by the heat of the Sunne is sometimes too hot, and the vapours are too much attenuated and ratified: so that the matter of Raine cannot be alwaies supplyed. This would Aristotle haue to bee the originall of all Springs and Fountaines ; So that the water should first distill as it were drop by drop, out of this vapourous matter: and this moist matter so collected and drawne together, should afterward breake forth out of the ground, and so cause such fountaines. Some reasons are also produced to proue this assertion; for (say the Authors of this opinion) If the Springs and Riuer should proceed from any other cause, then they should take their beginning from Raine-water, which is before refuted; or from the Sea by certain secre passages, which opinion seemes too weake to endure examination: First, this seemes an argu∣ment, that the Sea-water is commonly Salt but the water of Springs and Riuers is for the most sweet and fresh ; and there∣fore such Springs are not deriued from the Sea: Secondly, be∣cause we neuer find the Sea to be emptied, which must needes be, if it should giue beginnings to all such currents of water in the Earth; Thirdly (we haue already shewed) that the super¦ficies of the Earth is higher then the Water; so that it cannot be conceiued how riuers should be deriued from the Sea. To this opinion, howsoeuer seeming probable, and supported with the name and authority of so great a Philosopher, I dare not wholly assent; forasmuch as it thwarts the Testimony of holy Scripture, and cannot otherwise stand with reason: be∣cause it cannot well be imagined how so many vapours, and so continually, should be ingendred in the bowels of the earth, to nourish so many and so great currents, as we see springing out of the Earth: for a very great quantity or portion of Aire being condensated and made Water, will become but as a little drop: The Aire, according to Aristotles grounds being by a Tenne-fold proportion thinner then the Water. Moreouer the Aire in these places seated in the superficies of the Earth, and higher then other places, and by consequent neerer the Sun, should rather be rarified and thickned ; because heat is the greatest cause of rarefaction, as we shall shew hereafter: for the reasons alleaged for these opinions, they are drawne only from the weaknes of their assertion▪ which hold that Foun∣taines are deriued either from Raine water, or from the Sea: both which wee haue examined briefly, and whereof wee shall speake hereafter. The Schoole of Conimbra, not vtterly reiecting all the former opinions▪ haue vndertakē to forgoe an opinion (as it were) partaking of all, pretending to say some∣thing more, when indeed they produce nothing besides the former. Their assertion they haue set downe, in eight propo∣sitions, which I will faithfully set downe, and then censure. The first is that in subterranean places vnder the superfi∣cies of the earth, is hid a great quantity of water, distingui∣shed into Riuers, Ponds, and Lakes. This they proue from the daily experiment of such as diggs diuerse wells and de pe trenches in the Earth; Who many times vnder the Earth; find not only many riuers and ponds, but many times happen vpon so great abundance of Water, that they can neither find the bottome or bounds thereof. To this they add an ex∣periment of Philip and Macedon recorded by Asclepiador who caused many men expert in digging of mettalls, to be let downe into an old and forsaken mine to search out the veines of mettalls, to see whether the couetousnesse of antiquity had left any thing to posterity. These men vsing great lights are said to haue found nothing there, but great and vast riuers and great receptacles of waters. This they also labour to con∣firme by many and suddaine eruptions and breaking out of waters out of the earth, whereof we shall haue occasion to speake more hereafter. This first position, howsoeuer in it selfe true enough, seemes litle to the purpose; but we will pro∣ceed to the second, which is this: That when God in the third day of the Creation seperated the waters into one place, and hid it in the cauerns and secret receptacles of the earth; at the same time dispersed into diuerse parts of the earth, a great quantity of water by diuerse occult passages and chan∣nels, whence comes that great masse of waters vnder the earth; which is before mentioned. This they seeme to per∣swade by reason: for (say they) as the wise Architect of all for mans sake, and the rest of liuing creatures for the vse of man, hath discouered the dry land, by restrayning all the waters in∣to one place: so it was most necessary, that he should in∣wardly water the earth; by which stones, mettalls, mineralls, & other such things in the bowells of the Earth, should in time grow and increase. Also that some water should from hence breake vp out of the Earth, for diuerse causes hereafter spe∣cified. Finally as Philo-Iudaeus affirmes, for the continuation of the parts of the earth, which otherwise might by drouth be seperated and diuided. The third proposition grounded on the two former is this; That many riuers and fountaines in diuerse places by Gods decree arise out of the earth, by quan∣tities of waters hid in the cauernes of the earth, which they proue by reasons drawne from the vtility of such fountaines and riuers, springing out of the earth. Fourthly they defend, that all fountaines and currents were not so made and appoin∣ted in the first Creation ; because Histories & experience teach vs, that many haue broken out of the ground afterwards; whereof we shall haue occasion to speake hereafter. Fi tly they affirme, that if the opinion of Aristotle be vnderstood of all fountaines and flouds, it cannot be approued; for as∣much as it seemes sufficiently declared in the third opinion, how such riuers might be generated without such vapours; as also because many arguments and places of holy Scriptures, seeme to proue the contrary. As also the foure Riuers of Pa∣radice created in the beginning of the world, cannot bee guessed to draw their originall from such vapours, as Aristo∣tle imagines; to which accord many ancient Fathers vpon these places recited in that opinion, whereas all riuers are thought to fetch their originall from the sea. Sixtly for the credit of their master Aristotle, they are constrained to auerre that although his opinion cannot be verified of all riuers and fountaines of the earth, yet if it be restrayned to some such perpetuall currents, it may haue probability, For asmuch aswe are to beleeue that many such large cauerns and holes are hid vnder the earth, in which no small quantity of vapours may be ingēdred. This probability is greater in those riuers which are lesser in quantity then the greater, for the reasons before shewed. Seuenthly they affirme that it is absolutely to be be∣leeued; that not only great riuers and currents are deriued from subterranean waters, which haue originall from the sea; but also lesse fountaines and springs for the most part, chal∣lenge the same beginning: whence they labour to proue by this reason, that in very few places of the earth there is found so perpetuall and apt disposition of vapours vnder the ground as to nourish so many and so great currents of water. Eight∣ly (say they) it cannot be denied, but that Waters aswell pro∣ceeding from raine, as that which is generated of vapours in the cauerns of the earth, sometimes may flow into fountaines and riuers: What concernes Torrents bred of raine, they haue recourse to the reasons of the first opinion; for others they make it also probable; because we see by experience that Vapours and Aire compassed about with earth, are by rea∣son of the cold enuironing it, turned into water, This is in∣deed the opinion of those subtill Iesuits of Conimbra, wherein although they giue a flourish, as if they would defend their master Aristotle, on whom they comment; yet meane they nothing lesse; but indeed warily sticke to the other of the Diuines and ancient Fathers of the Church, touching the de∣riuation of all from the sea, Which opinion, howsoe∣uer in it selfe most probable, they know not how to manage and defend against opposition. For whereas they suppose that in the first sep tion of the sea from the dry-land, a great quantity of water was dispersed into diuerse hollow places & cauerns of the earth, from whence Riuers are deriued and made; they haue not in any probable manner expressed, how this water should perpetually flow, and feed so many & great currents▪ For first, I would aske of these learned fathers, whether the water inclosed in the bowells of the earth, whence these springs are fed, be higher or lower then the fountaines arising out of them. If it be higher; whether the Riuers are continually nourished on the old store, or a new supply be daily made. That so great riuers should bee main∣tained so many thousand yeares out of the old prouision, is most improbable; because the mountaines out of which such springs arise, cannot be capable of so great a concauity: nei∣ther can it otherwise be imagined, but that many great riuers since the beginning, had either bin absolutely dried vp, or at least diminished in their quantity, their Cisterns being daily more and more emptied out into their channells. If they graunt that of this water, a fresh supply be made; it must be either from the sea or from vapours in the earth. It cannot bee from the sea : because (as wee haue proued before) the sea is lower then the fountaines, where springs breake out of the Earth; forasmuch as we see them runne to the sea from their fountaines, as from a higher to a lower place. That this sup∣ply of water in the depth of the earth should bee made by va∣pours ▪ it is also improbable in their opinion; who cannot i∣magine so many ingendred in one place, as to feed so great currents; as also because many riuers were apparant in the first creation ▪ as the foure great currents of Paradice. This obiec∣tion hath so farre driuen the Iesuits to their shifts, as that they haue bin enforced to haue recourse to the opinion of Thomas Aquinas, who dreames that the waters are enforced vpward by the influence of the heauens ▪ which they a litle before ast by, and we haue before sufficiently refuted. And whereas in the subsequent clause, they labour to salue this place of Ec∣clesiastes: That all Riuers come from the sea, and returne thi∣ther againe ; They are constrained to leaue their old grounds, and unne backe to Aristotle, who holds that all riuers had their originall from vapours, drawne vp by the sunne; where∣of the sea is the chiefe mother. It will bee expected at least that we should disclose our owne opinion, hauing censured the former: which we will briefly doe as neere as probability can lead vs, submitting also to those which are more iudicious▪ First therefore▪ we will suppose as probable: that the earth is in a manner compassed round about with water; for howsoe∣uer the places more eminent, and separated for our habitati∣on, be dry land▪ yet not farre vnder the superficies of the earth, whereon we tread, is the earth sprinkled round with water, for which we may draw an argument; aswell frō the Porous and spongy nature of the Earth, which is apt to drinke in the water of the sea, in the same hight; (because it is the nature of the water, to diffuse it selfe abroad) as also from experi∣ence of Minors and such as digg deepe into the earth, who in most parts find water▪ 2 ly , this water so enuironing the earth, were it left to it's own naturall situation, without an exter∣nall Agent, would lift his superficies no higher, then the su∣perficies of the sea; because being as one with the sea, it will challenge the same Sphericall superficies. Now to know how the water thus naturally settled, is notwihtstanding lif∣ted vp higher to become the source of Springs, we must vn∣derstand, that it comes to passe not onely by the heat of the sunne and starres, piercing farte vnder the superficies of the earth, according to the circle, we haue allotted to the water. But also to subterranean fires hid in the bowells of the earth, in many places: which are caused by sulphurous matter set on fire by the sunne, or some other accident: whether this sulphu∣rous matter be pure Brimstone, or Bitumen, or a mine of sea-coale, as some haue thought of our Ba h s in England, I will not curiously here dispute, being of it selfe too large a sub∣iect for me in this place to handle. This heat may be conceiued to concur to the production of fountaines 2 manner of waies: First, by drawing vp diuerse moist vapours, which by reason of the thicknesse and solidity of the earth, being not presently euaporated out of the superficies of the earth, are enforced to disperse themselues through diuerse crooked passages, where condensated by cold distilling againe into drops of water, they breake out through some places of the earth, and so become a fountaine. A second way which may also seeme probable, is that the Heat peircing the Subterranean Water, though not able to dissolue much of it into vapours for the solidity of the earth, may notwithstanding through his heat, Rarifie and attenuate these waters. These waters then rarified, must needs seeke a greater place, wherein they may be contained: sith Rarefaction is nothing else but the extension of a body to a greater place then before it occupied. Hence is the Water enforced to enlarge his limits: This enlargement or the place cannot be downeward towards the Center; because all that place was supposed to be filled vp as farre as the Earth could drinke it. Wherefore it must needs extend it's limits sidewise, or vpwards: By the former of which it may find a passage to breake forth on the superficies of the ground: By the latter it may be lifted high enough, to runne from the side of a higher mountaine, towards the Sea-shore. If any man should aske why this Rarefaction & swelling of the Water is not so sensi∣ble in the open Ocean, I answere that the sea is also much rarified & lifted vp by reason of the sunnes heate: which whe∣ther it be the cause of ebbing and flowing of the sea, in part we haue before disputed: Secondly that the sea-water should not rise so high as other water vnder the ground, these rea∣sons may be giuen; First that the Ocean hath a larger channell to runne abroad on either side, and so this swelling must of necessity become more insensible, whereas the Waters in ca∣uerns & concauities of the Earth, being oftentimes straightly bounded on either side, by the narrownesse of the channell, must of necessity take vp the more in hight and eminency. 2 the Sunne, heauenly bodies and subterranean fires worke more strongly and effectually on the open nakednes of the sea, then on the waters hid vnder the ground, which are more shrow∣ded from such an extreame heat. Whence it comes to passe, that many parts of the sea, are dissolued into vapours, and so consumed and dispelled by the same; Whereas this heat in the Subterranean waters being more moderatly impressed; doeth not dissolue into vapours, and consume so great a quantity of water; but being of a middle temper, rather rarifies it to the vse forenamed. This seemes the more probable, because spring water rising commonly in the sides of mountaines, is for the most part thinner then the Sea-water, as experience dayly warrants, Thirdly the subterranean vapours are soo∣ner dissolued into dropps of water by reason of the cold they must necessarily meete within their passage, through the Earth ; whereas the other from the Sea meet with no such en∣counter till they arriue at the Middle-Region of the Aire, whence they returne againe in showres of Raine. 2 All riuers and Fountaines were not from the beginning. For the confirmation of this assertion, many histories may be produced: It is reported that in Caria neere about the city Lorus, there arose out of the Earth suddenly a great floud of Water, bringing out with it a great quantity of creatures and fishes, of which being fatted vnder the Earth, whosoeuer chanced to eat, dyed presently. The like is reported, that at the time of the Mithridatick warre, at a certaine city of Phry∣gia named Apamea, there sprang vp out of the ground many new Lakes, Fountaines, Brookes ; and that one riuer sprang vp very salt, which brought vp with it a great quantity of Oisters, and other Sea-fishes ; although the city Apamea bee very farre off from the Sea. This is reported by Nicolaus Da∣mascene. Also Cardinall Contarenus testifies in the second booke of Elements, that in a cleare day being in Valentia in Spaine, there happened a very great inundation of water brea∣king out of the Earth, which being carried towards the City, had well neere turned it into the Sea, had not the gates bin shut, and dammes well ordered. Why this sudden change should sometimes happen, many reasons may be produced. The first reason may be, because of some sudaine ruine or fal∣ling downe of some parts of the Earth, whereby the courses of the riuers being one way stopped, must needs seeke out a passage some other way. This sometimes happens in great Earth-quakes, as we may reade in Theophrastus, that in the mountaine Coricus, after an Earth-quake many new springs and fountaines discouered themselues. Another reason not much vnlike the former is giuen from the Hardnes of the Earth, which oftentimes stopping and hindering the naturall course of the water, enforceth it to seek a new passage. Hence the foresaid Theophrastus was induced to belieue, that in a Ci∣ty of Crete the fountaines were stopped vp because the Inha∣bitants betoke themselues to another place; so that the soile was not so much shooke and moued as before. A third reason may be the wasting or cutting downe of great woods on the Earth; for it is the nature of the Trees and plants to suck to themselues the Moisture of the ground into one place. But these trees cut downe or remoued, the waters course must needes be altered. 3 Many Riuers are for a great space of land swallowed vp of the Earth: whereof some af∣ter a certaine distance rise againe. This is confirmed by many Historicall instances, as of the riuer Timanus in the prouince of Aquilia, of Erasenus in Argo∣lica, Padus in the Alpes, more remarkeable is that of the river Guadiaua in Spaine: which runneth vnder the ground, for the space of 13 leagues: and neere to a towne called Villa Horta breakes vp againe▪ the like is recorded of Eurota in Arcadia, which is said to breake forth of the ground in the Prouince of Lacedamon: So Cadmus Asia is swallowed vp in a hole of the ground, not farre from Laodicea, So Pira s in Catonia. Licus in Libanon, Orontes in Syria. Other riuers are thought to haue found a secret passage vnder the sea from one Region to another: As a riuer hauing his fountaine in the mountaine Meia es, which being conuayed in a blind Channell vnder the middle of the sea, comes forth againe at the port of P ∣normus : so others report of Alpheus, which being drowned vnderground nere the Peloponnesian shore, takes a large iour∣ny vnder the Sea, till it arriue at Syracuse, where it ends in A∣rethuse ; which brings forth (they say) such things as are cast into Alpheus: which is much like that which is spoken of the Well of Aesculapius in Athens, wherein if any thing were cast, they were rendred againe in Phalericus : But this last I rather hold as a poeticall fiction, then a true History. Some ri∣uers there are which are not wholly drowned in the earth; but for some part; a a part of the Rh n , which is hid about foure thousand paces from the city Cauba, and shewes it selfe again before it come to Bonna : in like manner a part of Danu∣ ius which hides it selfe about Greina a Towne of Panonia superi r : some riuers there are againe, which are not drunke vp immediatly of the earth, but of certaine great Lakes into which they fall as Iordan of the Lake Asphaltites: some lakes againe hauing swallowed vp riuers (as it were) vomit them forth againe, as Rubresius casts out Ara e in the Prouince of Narbon, and so Lemanus the riuer Rhodanus in the same Pro∣uince: also in Italy, Lorus cast out Abdua; Eupilus, Lambre; Fucinus, Marcia. 4 Riuers for the most part rise out of great Mountaines, and at last by diuerse or one In∣let, are disburthened into the sea. The first part of this proposition is manifest enough out of di∣uerse instances of the greatest riuers in the world: for all Geo∣graphers will giue you to vnderstand, that the riuer Indus in I dia is deriued from the mountaine Ca casus. Tanais from the Riphaean mountaines in Sarma ia, Araxis from Panardes in Armenia, Po from the Vesusian Hills in Liguria, Danubius from Arnobia in Germany, Exesus in Norico from the moun∣taines Elachia Isara from the ridge of the Alpes toward France and Durias toward Italy from thence. So from the Herminian mount ines in Portugall are deriued three great Riuers: So Nilus in Africk from the mountaines of the Moone : These ri∣uers thus rising, are of diuerse kinds; for some haue visible ap∣parant springs and fountaines: others are deriued from Lakes, out of which they runne. As Alba in Prusia, out of Elbinga, Medoarus & Oxus out of two lakes of the same names, neere the Alpes; Rindacus from Artinia a poole besides Melito∣polis. The reason why riuers should be ingendred in moun∣taines, and such high places, may be giuen; because they are made (as we shewed before) by the heat of the sunne, starres and subterranean fires, rarifying and attenuating the Waters. And this operation of the sunne in higher places, must needes be more effectuall then in lower. Now for the second part, it is plaine to proue, that all riuers runne into the sea: either ma∣king a passage from their fountaines, on the land toward the sea shore, as Nilus and Danubius, with other riuers, or by dis∣burthening themselues into greater riuers, wherein they are conuaied into the sea: as the 60 great Nauigable riuers, which empty themselues into Danubius, or at least are swallowed vp of the Earth, and so reduced againe to their first mother; which we may imagin of the riuers forespoken of, drunk vp of the Earth: Although all riuers (as we shewed (fall into the sea yet not all in one & the selfesame fashion; if we respect their passage on the lād. For some are caried into the sea by one o tiū or mouth, whereof we haue two notable examples; the first of a great riuer in Brasill called Rio de La Plate, which is cari∣ed into the sea, by a mouth of 40 leagues with such violence, that the Marriners may hence draw fresh water, before they come within sight of land. The other not much vnlike, is that which runnes by the kingdome of Congo & Angolo, which is six and thirty thousand paces broad▪ where it enters into the sea, and is caried with such a force, that it seuers the waues, & keeps his owne channell, and renders the shipp-men fresh water betwixt the sea waters, for the distance of eight hūdred thousand paces. Other great riuers are disburthened into the sea, by diuers Ostia or Inletts ; as Rhene into the Germane Oce∣an by three; Danubius into the Pontick sea▪ by 6; Indus into the Iud an sea by 7; Nilus into the Mediterranean by 7 great and famous passages▪ Volga into the Caspian lake by 72 gates. These are the most remarkeable: others we shall supply in our historicall part. 5 Diuerse fountaines are endowed with di∣uerse admirable vertues and operations. There is nothing wherein Nature delighteth more in mi∣raculous variety, then in fountaines and springs of the earth. Of these admirable workes of nature, being infinite in these springs, I will touch some. Which the better to effect, I will reduce all to these heads: 1 Their qualities and operations. 2 their motiōs: For the former we will produce some sew instā∣ces. It is reported, that neere the Garamantes there is a foun∣taine so cold in the dayes that no man can drinke thereof; so hot in the nights, that no man can abide to touch it: There is another in India wherein a candle will burne. There is also another called heretofore the well of Iupiter Hammon which in the morning is luke-warme: at noone col ▪ in the euening Hot, at midnight boiling hot ; From whence againe it begins to asswage till the morning; and so (as it were) by turne it growes hot and cold ▪ a matter of great admiration. Some fountaines in Liguria & Paphlagonia being drunke will make the head giddy as if he had drunke wine. Another fountaine in Aranea a part of Arcadia being drunke; will so affect the tast, that who drinke it shall neuer afterward endure the tast of wine: which was very like the fountain Clitorius whereof Ouid in his Metamorphosis the last booke sings in this man∣ner: Clitorio quioun{que} sitim de fonte leu is, Vina fugit, gaudet{que} meris abstemius vndis. The ancients haue also recorded, that in Boeotia neere the ri∣uer Orchomenon, are two fountaines; whereof the one gets memory, the other causeth obli io ▪ There is in the Iland Cea a fountaine making the senses dull; another in Aethiopia ▪ whereon the Water drunken will make a man mad: Some water absolutely kils him which drinkes▪ as the riuer Styx in Arcadia, being a venemous fretting poison, and therefore by the poets fained to be one of the riuers in Hell. Diuers o∣ther riuers are profitable to cure diuers diseases of the body, whereof I need not bring any instances; because such new∣found wells are sometimes discouered ongst vs here at home. There are 2 riuers in B eotia of admirable vertue▪ whereof the former, if a sheep drinke of it, he will become yellow : but if a sheep of a dunne or yellow colour drinke of the other, he wil become white: Riuers which make sheep white coloured besides, are Neleus in Euboea, Aliac on in Macedo∣nia: Crathris in Thurijs: so Cerius in Euboea, Auxius in Ma∣cedonia, Peneas in Thessaly, will make them blacke: will cause whitenesse in oxen : So the riuer Astaces in Ponti waters the land, whereby mares haue their milke blacke. A∣mongst the regions of the Troglodites, there is a well which thrice a day will become sweet and bitter, and againe returne to his former sweetnesse: and so often againe in the night. This may suffice to shew the variety of operations in these wells, in respect of other creatures. No lesse admirable variety is discouered in obseruing of their diuerse motions. For some ri∣uers ouerflowe their bankes at some certaine times of the yeare, Nilus in Egypt, Euphrates in Mesopotania, Ind in Indi ▪ some fountaines are carried with such violence, that they cast vp stones, as M rsia in Phrygia, and expell any weight as a certaine one in Arabia, whereof the like was re∣corded to be in Portugall: some will swallow vp any thing owne into them, as one in Portugall, if we beleeue Pliny: some others although they are cold, will seeth and seeme to boil a the water o the fire; yet neuer cast out their water beyond their b nk , but straight-way swallow it vp againe, as Acidula in Alb g , and nother fountaine in Cappidoci named Tia ▪ some there are which sometimes rise and swell, and other times fall againe of their owne accord, as Crater of , and a fountaine in Italy called Ph iana: some wells imitate the bbing and flowing of the sea in all encreases and di∣mi utions, as one in Cale , and the other neare Burdeaux in France: some are contrariwise affected to the ebbing & flow∣ing of the sea flowing when the sea bbs, and bbing when the sea flowes as certaine Pits in Spaine: some encrease and dimi∣nish without any consent or agreement with the motion of the sea; as a Well in Tenodus, an Iland neere Troy. In Canta∣bria are three fountaines, distant 8 foot the one from the o∣ther, and falling into one Channell in a vast riuer, which eue∣ry day are dry twelue times, and sometimes twenty times: o∣thers of their own accord purge & cleanse themselues, casting out wood, clay, durt, and other matters wherewith they are defiled, as a Well in the Chersonesus of Rhodes. These and ma∣ny more remarkeable instances haue our naturall Historians gathered together, whereof though some perhaps may bee thought to be forged of Poets for pleasure, or mistaken for want of good discouery and obseruation; yet must wee not wrong Antiquity so much as to reiect all, hauing in this sub∣iect enough to wonder at in ourowne Country. 6 Places neare great Riuers and Lakes are most commodious for habitation. It hath bin the custome of all times and nations almost in the world, to choose out for a choice place for building of ci∣ties, their habitation neere some great Lake, Riuer, or Arme of the Sea; which sprang from the common obseruation of Men, who found such places to be more conuenient. This conue∣niency is shewed many wayes: first, because by meanes of such water they haue quick passage and trafficke with other Nations, being able with more ease both to receiue, & to send forth wares and merchandize. Whence we see that such cities as are seated vpon the water, are commonly of all other the richest : whereof we may giue an instance almost in euery countrey, as of Seuill and Lisbone in Spaine & Portugall : of all the Cities almost of the Low-countries ; of Paris in France : whence (no doubt) grew that English Prouerbe▪ That the Sea is a good neighbour ; which may aswell be vnderstood of any nauigable Riuer. Secondly such a site is most conuenient for the purging away of all filth and excrements, which could not with the like conueniency bee so soone transported by land: whence many men haue laboured to transport riuers far remote vnto Cities. Thirdly, because such riuers and wa ry lakes yeeld store of fish, whereby the Inhabitants may be nou∣rished, and other creatures the better preserued: Fourthly, no small commodity would accrow to a Cyty by water neare ad∣ioyning If it should chance (as often it doth) to be set on fire ; for hauing water neare it, it may soone be quenched: whereas many little springs cannot afford so much water as would suffice for such a purpose. Lastly, amongst other reasons wee cannot forget the pleasantnes of faire riuers, which are no small ornaments to a City, and delights to the eye of the In∣habitants. 8 Thus much for riuers: A Lake is a collec∣tion of perpetuall waters, nourished with fresh springs, and hauing of it selfe no pas∣sage forth. In this definition of a Lake, wee haue comprized these three things: First that it is a collection of constant and perpetuall waters: Secondly, that it is continually fed & che∣rished with fresh springs, rising vp from the bottome. Third∣ly, that it finds no passage forth into the sea or otherwise. By the two first it is distinguished from a great Pond or standing poole called in Latin Stagnum : For asmuch as a standing poole, being commonly ed with raine water, and hauing no springs from the Earth whereby it may bee long nourished, is often times by the heat of the sunne exhausting it out by vapours, either extraordinarily diminished, or altogether dried vp: Whereas in a Lake by reason of fresh springs, the Water is perpetuall and remaineth sweet and holsome, except by some other accidents, it change it's disposition. For the latter clause that a lake finds no passage forth, it may bee two waies vnderstood: either of a visible or apparant passage outwardly through the superficies of the Earth to the sea, or of a secret and subterranean passage vnder ground: The former may againe be vnderstood of a passage forth immediatly by it selfe, or mediatly by some riuer: whereas wee haue said that it finds no entrance into the sea, we ought to vnderstand it, that immediately it is not to be accompted a continuate part con∣ioyned with the sea: neuerthelesse it may be disburthened into the sea by some riuers running out of it, as some would haue the great riuer Tanais not to haue his head or fountaine in the Riphaean mountains, as the ancients haue taught, but in a cer∣taine Lake not fa re from the city Tulla ▪ so Volga & Edill draw their originall from a lake not farre from Moscow: with many others of like nature. What to thinke of the subterranean in∣tercourse betwixt Lakes and the sea, wee will shew in this Theoreme. 1 It is probable, that most Lakes haue some se∣cret intercourse with the sea vnder ground. For the confirmation of this point, there want not reasons: The first reason may be drawne from the quantity of Water in most Lakes, which is found without any great sensible dif∣ference to remaine the same, without any diminution or en∣crease; whereas if the water bound in with these limits, should haue no passage out any way, it should encrease to such greatnes, that it would easily ouerwhelme the bankes To giue a few instances, we find that diuerse very vast riuers ex∣haust themselues into the Caspian Lake as Volga and Edill, which receiuing into them many notable riuers, are at last themselues swallowed vp in the said lake: In like manner the Lake of Palestine called the dead sea, is known to receiue into it besides diuerse lesser riuers, the great and famous riuer Ior∣dan. Heere would I demaund, whether these great riuers perpetually casting themselues into a Lake, giue an encrease to the former quantity or not: if they should augment the water, they would by consequence alter the bounds: But this is contradicted by experience. If the quantity of the water suffers no encrease, it must needs follow then, that the wa∣ter should some other way be diminished, as it is heere encrea∣sed. This must either be by the sunne drawing vp some parts of it by vapours, or by some cauerns of the Earth, drinking vp some parts of it: Or lastly by a subterranean passage into the sea: Concerning the former it cannot bee denied, but much Water is drawne vp into vapours by the heat of the sun yet that these vapours counteruaile the water perpetually brought in, is in my conceit very improbable: for against this quantity of water extracted out this way of evaporation, I will oppose these three things which shal perswade a reaso∣nable man, that the water receiued in, shall farre surpasse the vapours exhaled from it▪ First that the vapours are stirred vp in the day time, when the sunne is lifted aboue the Horizon ; at such a height that his heat is somewhat strengthned, wher∣as all these watry currents neuer intermitting their vsuall course, neuer cease to runne by day or night: wherein is seen a double aduantage of the riuers, in respect of the watry exha∣lation▪ Secondly of these watry vapours, so drawne out, a great part must at diuerse times returne back, or at least so much otherwise by rayny showres, dropped downe into this Lake. Thirdly, these watry parts thus rarified and attenuated in vapour should (putting this supposition) in equality, diffuse themselues abroad in such extraordinary manner, that all the Regions round about should in all likely-hood suffer a great inconueniency of foggy exhalations. On the other side it is very vnlikely, that it should bee receiued into empty ca∣verns of the Earth, without passage into the sea, or some great riuer, disburthening it selfe thereunto. For I would de∣maund whether these cauerns were euer filled with water or not? if they haue been filled, how could they receiue more water, sith the filling of any place supposeth it to be first empty. That they were neuer yet filled with Water, is farre more vnreasonable: that any man should imagine, any ca∣uerne of the Earth to bee so vast, with so great currents of Water perpetually running in almost six thousand yeares, should not replenish: especially considering the bow∣ells of the Earth, not farre from the vpper face, to be every where spread with Water round, which might also helpe to this purpose: Wherefore it cannot well bee imagined but that euery such great lake, hath some vent or passage vn∣to the sea, either by some secret & subterranean channell, or at least by some great riuer issuing out of it, and so running into the Ocean. Another reason may be taken from the cur∣rents of some seas, which are by good reason ascribed to this cause: For it is obserued by skilfull Nauigatours, that the Water is carried by a very stiffe course from Propontis and the black sea into the Aegaean, and from thence into the Me∣diterranean : The originall of which current m y with good coniecture be found out in the Caspian, which by some secret passage vnder ground, disburthening it selfe into the black sea, causeth it to enforce his owne waters farther of, for the re∣ceit of the other. Thirdly that these subterranean passages are not vnlikely, may be confirmed by many riuers which are swallowed vp, some wholly, some for ome place only of the Earth, whereof we haue spoken before. Also it may seeme likely by the Water, spread round about the Earth, which through the bowells of it find a passage from the sea, bea∣ring as it seemes the same leuell. This may (for ought wee know) be the originall of all Lakes, and this also may bee a way or meanes, whereby they empty and disburthen them∣selues being ouercharged with too much Water. CHAP. X. Of Mountaines, Valleyes, Plaine Regions, Woods, and Champian Countryes. 1 T He second variation in the figu∣rature of the Earth is expressed in Mountaines, Valleyes, and Plaine Countreyes. A Mountaine is a quantity of Earth heaped aboue the ordinary height of the land. A Valley is the depth of the Earth between two Mountaines. A plain is a space of Earth where there is found no notable rising or falling of the ground. The distinction of the Earth according to it's externall figurature into Mountaines, Valleyes, and Plaines is very na∣turall; because euery space or parcell of land in respect of the places neere or about it, must either rise higher, or fall lower, or at least must beare an equality; where the former is ad∣mitted, there must needs be Mountaines swelling higher then the ordinary leuell of the Earth; where the second is found, the ground is indented with Valleyes and concauities : where the third is to be seene, there must be Plaines. Here is to be no∣ted that howsoeuer Plaines absolutely considered, haue a sphericall surface for the most part, especially, if the Plaines be large because they concurre as circular segments to make vp the Spheare of the Earth; yet they may be called Plaines, because they so appeare to our sense, which in so short a di∣stance, cannot perceiue the Sphericall figurature of the Earth; Some Gramarians here curiously distinguish betweene mons or a Mountaine, and Collis or a Hillock, which is a little hill: & also betwixt Vallis, which they would haue to be a low parcell of ground betwixt two mountaines, and Conuallis which is a lower space, only bounded on one part by a moun∣taine, which Varro would haue to bee deriued from Cauata vallis ; but these Grammatical scruples are of small vse to such as spend themselues on greater matters: because the ordinary & vsual manner of speech (euen amongst the vulgar) will shut out all mistakes in this kind; what deserues the study of To∣pographer concerning this, shall be expressed in these Theo∣remes. 1 Mountaines, Valleyes, and Plaines were created in the Earth from the beginning, and few made by the violence of the Deluge. It hath bin the opinion of some, aswell Diuines as Philo∣sophers, that the violence of the Deluge hath extraordinarily altered & defaced the Earth, being the chiefe cause of Moun∣taines & Valleyes therein: but this opinion is contradicted by many reasons; first out of the Text it selfe of Genesis, where it is said, that the water of the flood ouer-flowed by 15 Cubits the highest Mountaines: to which may be added the Testimo∣ny of Damascenus, who reports, that in the time of the De∣luge many resorted to a high mountaine of Armenia, called Baris, where they saued themselues which last clause although it expresly contradicts the holy Scriptures, which speake but of Eight Persons that were saued: yet it is a sufficient testimo∣ny to proue that such Mountaines were before the Flood, and therefore not made by it: Secondly had there followed so great an alteration of the Earth, to cause mountaines as some imagine, then should not the same places after the flood retain their names, bounds, and descriptions, which they did before the flood; the contrary whereof we find, in that Moses writing of Paradice, & other places, about 850 yeares after the flood, was most exact in setting down the Names, Limits, and whole description of them, as though they had remained to be seene in his dayes. Thirdly, had the violence of the waters beene so great as to raise vp mountaines in the Earth, it would without doubt haue bin forceable enough to haue turned Riuers, and haue changed them from one place to another, cast downe and demolished the greatest Cities and buildings, throwne downe and ouer-whelmed all plants and vegetalls on the Earth, and (as it were) haue buried from all succeeding time, the memories of the former ages, so that little or no∣thing should appeare: but this may bee proued other∣wi e by sundry Instances: First that the Riuers haue still remained the same, may appeare out of the place alleaged of Genesis, where Moses speaking of the site of Paradice, sets downe all the riuers of it exactly, especially Tigris & Euphrates : out of the which we may easily gather in what longitude and latitude it stood: had any thing bin altered in the course of the riuers, it is likely Moses would haue speci∣fied it in this Historie, that after ages looking for these places, might not mistake or suspect the truth of his Relations: Se∣condly, that it hath not extinguished all Buildings ▪ and anci∣ent monuments of the fathers before the flood, may probably be coniectured by the testimony of Iosephus a writer of good credit, who affirmeth that he saw one of the pillars, erected by Seth, the second from Adam ; which pillars were set vp a∣boue 1426 yeares before the flood, accompting Seth to bee a hundred yeares old at the erection of them, and Iosephus himselfe to haue liued some 40 or 50 yeares after Christ ; Now although we are not bound to credit all thar he relates; yet may we trust him concerning such matters as happened in his time; and that this pillar was set vp by Seth was neuer yet called in question, but warranted by antiquity: the like is re∣corded by Berosus of the Citty of Enoch, that it was not de∣molished by the flood, but remained many yeares after, the ruines whereof as Annius in his commentary reports, were to be seene in his time, who liued in the time of Ferdinand and Isabella of Castile. It is also reported by Pomponius Mela, that the Citty of Ioppa was built before the flood, of which Cepha was King, whose name with his brother Phineus to∣gether with the grounds and principles of their religion, were found grauen vpon Altars of stone: All which are sufficient to proue the violence of the Waters, not to haue bin so great to demolish all mountaines and monuments ; Moreouer it may be plainly proued out of the text, that the Waters suffered the plants and trees of the Earth to grow, and remaine as▪ they did before; because it is said, that when Noah the second time sent out the Doue, she returned with an oliue branch in her mouth, which no doubt she had plucked from the trees, after the trees were vncouered; for otherwise she might the first time haue found it floating on the Waters: a manifest proof that the trees were not torne vp by the roots, or turned topsy turuy, but remained fixed in the Earth as they did be∣fore. Fourthly, had the water suffered this extreame violent motion, as whereby it might make many mountaines. I aske whence this motion should come▪ it could not bee from the naturall motion of the water, which is to moue downward: for what descent of waters can bee in a Sphericall round bo∣dy, where no part is higher, or lower? That there was any wind to driue and enrage the Waters, is very vnlikely; be∣cause it is said, that God caused a wind to passe vpon the Earth, and the Waters ceased▪ so that there was no wind till the Waters sanke: Lastly, wee may argue from a finall cause, that this inequality in the superficies of the Earth was before the flood; because it is certaine that all things were in as good or better estate, then now with vs, and that the Earth was a∣dorned with all varieties of creatures as well for profit ; as de∣lectation. Now it is found by experience, that all commo∣dities agree not to all places, but some are found in the moun∣taines, at all sorts of mettalls & mineralls, Plants, & Vegetalls for the most part prosper best in the vallies and plaines : Also that the mountaines serue for a shelter to guard the vallies from the rigor of cold and wind, both for the better conueni∣encie of mans life, and encrease of fruits for the vse of man: Whence we may conclude, that it is farre more probable, that the great Mountaines were so created in the beginning, and not made by the flood; yet can wee not deny, but that some small Hillockes might be made by the flood, and afterward by the industrie of man, which haue raised great fortresses, and bulworks, which afterward decaied, were made great heaps of Earth (as we see many in this land) but this is of small note & not worthy consideration, in comparison of the great moun∣taines of the Earth whereof we especially treat. 2 The perpendicular height of the highest mountaines seldome exceeds 10 furlong. This proposition depends on the authority of Eratosthenes a famous Mathematician, who being employed by his King, found out by Dioptrick Instruments the height of the highest mountaines, not to exceed the quantity aboue specified▪ Cle∣omedes extends this a little farther, and would haue some mountaines to attaine the height of 15 furlongs, of which height he would haue an high rock in Bactriana called by Strabo 11 libro Sisimitrae Petra ; But yet if we credit Pliny on Dicaearch who measured the Mountain Pelion accōpted the highest, he found it not to exceed 1250 paces which make 10 furlongs : and Solinus relates the mountaines of Thessaly to be higher then else-where are to bee found. But this opinion howsoeuer supported by the authority of the ancient and fa∣mous Mathematicians, hath been called in question as well by moderne, as ancient writers. Many matters are miracu∣lously, or rather fabulously spoken of the Mountaine Athos in Macedonia, of Cassius in Syria, and another of the same name in Arabia, of the mountaine Caucasus, and others: which Histories notwithstanding are related by no meaner Authors then Aristotle, Mela, Pliny, and Solinus, yet it is not hard to imagine, that these Authors might bee deceiued in those times, either trusting to other mens relations, or wanting Mathematicall instruments, to search these matters: Of the Mountaine Athos it is much wondred at, that it should cast a shadow from Macedonia into the market-place of Myr∣hina a towne of the Iland Lemnos, distant from Athos 86 miles: But this as our learned Countriman M r Hues well obserues, can bee no great argument of such a miraculous height; because the mountaine Athos situate East from Lem∣nos (as may be gathered from Ptolomies Table) may with∣out any great wonder cast a very long shadow, the Sunne either rising, or setting. Other matters are related of this mountaine Athos more strange then the former, to wit, that it should in hight transcend the Region of the raine, and wind, which they would striue to confirme out of an old tra∣dition; that the ashes heaped together on certaine Altars built on the top thereof were nener blowne away, but remained in the same manner as they were left: to which may be added out of Strabo, that they who inhabit the top of this moun∣taine, can see the Sunne 3 houres before those who inhabit neere the sea: The like is reported by Aristotle of the Moun∣taine Caucasus, that for the extreame height; the top of it en∣ioyes the Sun-beames a third part of the night; Litle lesse is spoken by Pliny and Solinus of the mountaine Cassius in Sy∣ria and by Pomponius Mela of the mountaine Cassius in A∣rabia ; But how fabulous and incredulous these things are, Petrus Nonius and other Mathematicians haue sufficiently demonstrated out of the grounds of Geometry; more absurd by farre seemes that, which Eustathius reports of Hercules pillars celebrated by Dionysius Perieges, for their admirable height; whereas they are found not to exceed 100 ells making one furlong; a height according to Strabo not exceeding the Aegyptian Pyramides, and comming short of certaine Indian trees neare the Riuer Hyarotes, whose Meridian shadowes reach 5 furlongs; These errours in the ancient might seeme veniall had they not bin seconded by latter writers: Of the Mountaine Tenariffe in the Canaries, Scaliger is bold to report out of other mens relations, that it riseth in height aboue 15 leagues, which make 60 miles; but Petricius more bold then he, would haue it 70 miles; Litle lesse is spoken of Pico a∣mongst the Azoris In ul , and the Mountaine Andi in Peru ; But to confute these relatiōs we will vse this argument; It is reported by the Spanish writers which haue spoken of this place, that the topps of these Mountaines scarce any one or two moneths in the yeare are free from snow : Now that snow should bee ingendred aboue 60 or 70 miles aboue the ordinary plaine of the Winter or Earth, is against the iudgmēt of our best Astronomers ; because, as they haue obserued out of Eratosthenes measure, the highest vapors seldome reach so farre as 48 miles in height euery way from the Earth. This argument may as well serue to confute these ancient opinions before mentioned, had they not been so fabulous, as scarce to deserue any solide confutation. 3 The ordinary height of the Land aboue the Sea in diuerse places is more then the hight of the highest Mountaines aboue the ordinary face of the Earth. We haue probably shewed out of former grounds, that as the ordinary height of the Earth is answerable to the ordi∣nary depth of the Sea, so the hilles and mountaines in propor∣tion answere to the whirle-pooles and extraordinary Gulphes of the Sea: but it is to be imagined that the depth of the Sea in the maine Ocean, is farre more below the superficies of the Earth then those other whirle-pooles and Holes extend them∣selues below that depth. But to proue this by a more sensible argument we will compare the one with the other, so farre forth as Mathematicians by experience haue guessed▪ for it is found by Mathematick Instruments (as wee haue proued in the precedent Theoreme) that the highest Mountaines sel∣dome or neuer mount vpward aboue ten furlongs, which is an English mile, and a quarter: but the hight of the Land in some places where appeare no such hills, is obserued to be much more: to proue which assertion, we can haue no fitter argument then the fresh Springs of Riuers; for it is manifest that all Riuers are higher at the Spring or fountaine, then at the place where they disburthē themselues into the sea. Now although water is apt to slide away at any Inequality, yet it is most probable that in greater riuers, especially where the wa∣ters fall oftentimes with violence (as at the Cataracts of Nile ) much inequality must bee granted in the Declivity of the ground: supposing yet the water for euery mile to gaine two foot in the Declivity of the ground, we shal find the hight ve∣ry neere to equalize the hight of the highest mountaines ; al∣though 2 foot in a mile is farre lesse then can be imagined in so great a Riuer. The Riuer which I take for an example shall be Nilus, which we shall obserue to runne about 50 Degrees from South to North, which resolued into miles will make 3000 accompting for euery mile 2 foot, we shall haue 6000 foot, which will be neare these 10 furlongs, being a mile and 5 parts; then allowing for these mighty Cataracts where the water falls with so great a violence, we must reckon a number of feet far greater then this measure; for euery mile must the hight of land aboue the sea be much more then of the moun∣taines. 4 Mountainous Regions are commonly colder then other plaine countries. This proposition is not absolutely to bee vnderstood without a limitation: for some plaine Countries neere the Ar∣ticke Pole, may be colder then some hilly Regions neere the Aequatour, in regard of other concurrent causes: but here we speake (as the Logicians vse) caeteris paribus ; comparing two places either together like, or not much different, or at least in our vnderstanding, abstracting them from the mixture of all other considerations: that this Theoreme is worthy credite, diuerse reasons stand in readines to iustifie: the first may bee drawne from the cause of heat in Inferiour Bodies, which is the reflexion of the Sunne beames. Now that this reflexion is of more strength and validity in plaine then in hilly and moun∣tanous Countries, is euident: first, because (as the Optickes teach) the rayes are more ioyned and combined in a plaine, then in a conuex superficies; for howsoeuer the whole Earth be of it selfe Sphericall, yet the conuexity being not sensible, by reason of the vastnes of the Circle, whereby the conuexity is made lesse it may optically be called a plaine superficies: Se∣condly it is taught in the Optickes, that a reflexion is of more validity in an equall, then in an vneuen and ragged superficies, such as is found in Mountaines and vneuen places. A second reason why mountanous Regions should exceed others in cold, may be the vicinity of them to the middle Region of the Aire; for of all the Regions (if we beleiue Aristotle ) the mid∣dle is the coldest, as being more seperate from the Sunne the fountaine of heat, and the higher Region, farther off from the reflexion of the Sunne-beames, then the lower: Now sith the parts of the Earth are affected with the quality of the Aire, it must needs stand with reason, that the more it shall approach to the middle Region, the more it must partake of its quality. Thirdly, that this is consonant to obseruation, reasons are vr∣ged by experience of all Trauailers, who report the topps of Mountaines euen in the midst of Summer to be couered ouer with snow although situa e vnder or neare the Aequinoctiall Circle: Of this nature are the Alpes in Italy, the Mountaines of the Moone in Africke, And in Peru, and Tenariffe in the Canaries. That snow should be an effect of cold, I need nor la∣bour to confirme. A fourth reason may bee drawne from other effects of cold or heat ; for it is daily proued by experience, that such diseases as chiefly follow heat, especially the Pesti∣lence in Aegypt, and such plaine Countries, are wonderfull pre∣valent, whereas hilly and rockic Countries by the benefit of Nature stand in little feare of such Inconueniences. Lastly, no greater argument can be drawne, then from the disposition of such men as inhabite such hilly Regions, who haue all the Symptomes of externall cold, and internall heat ▪ In∣somuch as odin seemes to make a Harmony and o ∣cent betwixt the Northerne man and the Mountanist Southerne man & such as inhabite plaine countries ascribing to the former externall cold, and internall heate : to the latter ex∣ternall heate, and internall cold. How farre this compari∣son will hold, we shall haue more occasion to discusse here af∣ter, when we come to the consideration of the Inhabitants. Mountaines since the beginning of the world haue still decreased in their quantity, and so will continually decrease vntill the end. This obseruation Blaucanus, I know not how truly, ascribes to his owne Inuention: but to what Author soeuer we owe it, we must needs acknowledge a pleasant speculation, groun∣ded on good reason. This Theoreme to demonstrate the bet∣ter, we will first lay these grounds oftentimes before-menti∣oned. First (as appeares by testimony of holy Scripture) the figure of the Earth was in the beginning more perfectly Sphericall, ouer-whelmed euery-where with Waters. 2 ly That a seperation was made by translocation of the parts of the Earth, in such manner as some places admitting of conca∣uities, became the receptacle of the waters, other places wher∣on these parts of the Earth were heaped together, were made mountanous. 3. Hence will follow, that the Earth thus swel∣ling vp in high mountaines, is out of his naturall site and posi∣tion: & therefore according to the law of nature, will endeuour by litle and litle to returne to her former state and condition. Now that the Earth hath sensibly suffered such a change since the beginning, it is easie to shew out of experiments: the cau∣ses we shall find to be the water, aswell of the Rain as Riuers, which we shall demonstrate by these Reasons: 1 We see Ri∣uers by litle and litle continually to fret and eat out the feet of mountaines, whēce the parts thus fretted through, by cōtinuall falling downe weare out the mountaines, and fill vp the lower places in the valleyes, making the one to encrease, as the other to decrease, & the whole Earth to approach nearer to a Sphe∣ricall figure then before; which seemes to be warranted by a place in Iob 14, where he saith to God; The mountaine falling, commeth to ought, & the rocke is remoued out of his place. The waters weare the stones, thou washest away the things which grow out of the dust of the earth. From these Riuers in the valleyes continually eating through the parts of the Earth, as the feete of mountaines are caused those slow but great Ruines called Labinae, a lambendo, by which sometimes whole Townes and Villages haue bin cast into the next great Riuer. 2 To proue that Raine water challengeth a part in this diminution of mountains, we may shew by the like experiēce: we see plain∣ly that Raine-water daily washes downe from the Toppes of mountaines some parts of the Earth; whence it comes to passe that the highest mountaines are harder and more rocky then others as being more able to resist this violence of the water. Hence also it happens that old buildings being erected in the sides of mountaines, haue their foundations after a time vnco∣uered, and are much subiect to Ruines: an instance whereof may bee giuen out of the Romane Capitoll, whose foundation (according to the relation of George Agricola ) appeares now plainly aboue the ground, which without question was here∣tofore deepe rooted in the Earth. In Plaines and valleyes we find all things to happen contrary wise, to wit, that all places in regard of their superficies are raised much higher then they were in times past, The reason whereof may easily be giuen out of the great quantity of the Earth, carried by the washing of the Raine from the Topps of mountaines into the valleyes▪ whence we may perceiue old houses, heretofore fairely built, to be now almost buried vnder ground, and their windowes heretofore set at a reasonable hight, now growne euen with the pauement: so some write of the Triumphall Arch of Sep∣timius at the foot of the Capitoll Mountaine in Rome, now al∣most couered with Earth, insomuch as they are inforced to descend down into it by as many staires as formerly they were vsed to ascēd. In like sort we see in old Monasteries & Religi∣ous houses, their lower roomes, windowes, & doores, very far couched vnder groūd, of which great incōuenience we cannot suspect the Architects iudgment, but rather our fore-mentio∣ned cause: from this burying of parts of some houses vnder ground, it may be gathered, that the farther they are vnder ground, so much ancienter they are: as we may obserue heere with vs in Oxford, that our most ancient Colledges haue the windowes of their lower roomes, some-where altogether choaked vp with Earth without, or at least halfe way, in so∣much as the flore within, is found to bee farre inferiour in height to the street without: This is also confirmed by Ar∣chitects, who in digging vp old foundations, before they came to firme ground whereon to erect a building, are enfor∣ced first to remoue away the Rubbish or (as they terme it) the Made-ground, wherein oftentimes they find Wood, Iron-In∣struments, old coine, with diuers other Trash of this Nature. An instance we haue in some of the lower places in Somerset∣shire, where some vpon occasion digging the Earth somewhat deep, haue found great Okes turned topsy turvy with their Roots vpwards. To coniecture with some, that this was cau∣sed by Noah's Floud, seemes to be very improbable: 1 be∣cause as we haue formerly shewed in this Chapter, the Wa∣ter in the Deluge could not haue so violent a motion to pro∣cure such an alteration in the parts of the Earth. 2 It cannot so well be imagined how such Trees should remaine so long a time without putrefaction: wherefore we cannot well cast it on any other cause, then the addition of the earthly parts, brought by raine from the mountaines into the valleyes: and so by some Land-flood which partakes much of slimy and earthly matter dispersed abroad vpon the land about. Now on the contrary part wee find in few places of mountaines such made-ground which hath before beene moued. This will also appeare out of the industry of our Low-countreyman, who by baying vp the Riuers into certaine Artificiall Channels, the ground about hath been much raised: where on the contrary side the forcing of the water into higher places, oftentimes is found to fret through the Earth, and make it lower. What we haue spoken of the effects of Riuers and Raine in diminishing the greatnes of the mountaines and exalting of the vallyes, we may in some sort find in the sea. For the bottome of the Sea be∣ing lower then the Earth, and many great Riuers continually running from the Earth into it; it is manifest that there is car∣ried in their current a great quantity of earth, in so much as by the heaping of sand and earthly rubbish, the mouthes of great Riuers are in time choaked vp, and commodious hauens spoy∣led and remoued farther into the land: of which alternall trans∣mutation of the Sea and Land w shall speake hereafter: & for present instance need to goe no farther then diuerse Townes in Deuon, which (according to the Relation of ancient men) haue heretofore been faire hauens, able to receiue great ships, to which notwithstanding at this time a small boat cannot ar∣riue except in a full Tide. 1 Meteor. The like whereof is reported by A∣ristotle, 1 of a place in Egypt called Delta, made by the heap∣ing vp of sand and slime, brought by Nilus from the Ethiopian mountaine. 2 of Ammania Regio, which in times past being Sea, through the slime conuayed in the Riuers, became after∣wards as a standing poole, which in processe of time waxed dry, and ioyned it selfe to the Continent. 3 Of Maeotis Palus, that the dry land enuironing it round, is so much encreased, that ships of that burthen cannot arriue, which could in times past within 60 yeeres before; which is also in some sort testi∣fied by Polybius. 4 The like is related of Bosphorus Thracius, and many other places recorded by Pliny ▪ Lib. 4. of which we shall speake hereafter. From these obseruations Blancanus would inferre these consectaries: 1 That the Earth was not from the beginning endowed with mountaines: 2 That it should not so continue vntill the end of the world; nd vnlesse the Fire (whereof the Scripture speakes) should preuent it, the whole Earth should in the end be ouer-whelmed with waters, as in the beginning, and so be made void of habitation: but on such coniectures I dare not too boldly venture, being speculations built on no sufficient grounds: All which can hence warran∣tably be collected is expressed in our former Theoreme. 2 Of the Figurature of Countreyes in Moun∣taines, Valleyes, and Plaines, we haue spoken: It is requisite here wee speake somewhat of Woods and Champian Countreyes. 3 A Wood is a Region or space of Land beset with trees. A Champian Region is a space of Land either altogether voide, or scarce fur∣nished with trees. Some Criticks here curiously distinguish in Latine, betwixt Sylua, Lucus, and Nemus: by Sylua vnderstanding a space be∣set with trees, ordained to bee cut downe; but Lucus was a place where trees were not ordained to bee cut downe, but reserued sacred: For in such groues they did anciently vse to offer sacrifice, as may appeare by diuerse places out of the Old Testament, where the Heathenish manner of worshipping was forbidden, and sometimes reproued in the Kings of Iuda and Israel: That which the Latines call Nemus, is a Groue or Wood ordained onely for pleasure and recreation: but the discussing of these businesses rather belong to a Grammarian then a Geographer ; who takes little notice but of those matters which most principally and remarkeably belong to any Re∣gion; wherefore omitting other curiosities, wee haue distin∣guished onely betweene a Woody and a Champian Countrey; whereof (as wee haue defined) one is beset with a multitude of trees; the other with few or none. What concernes a Geo∣grapher to obserue in those matters, shall generally be compri∣sed in this Theoreme. 1 Woods in these dayes are not so frequent, nor so great as in ancient times. We cannot imagine otherwise then that the Earth soone vp∣on the flood, bearing in her wombe the seeds of all vegetals, being inwardly moistned, and outwardly comforted with Heat, should presently abound with plants of all sorts; in so much as in a short time each thing propagating it selfe by com∣munication of his own seeds, the whole Earth was ouergrown as one forrest: but afterwards as man began to spread and mul∣tiply on the face of the Earth, these Woods and Thickets be∣gan to suffer chastisement vnder the hand of laborious husban∣dry: For first to open a passage from one place vnto another, and that some parcels of ground should as pastures bee diuided from Woody acres, it was necessary that this great plenty of trees should suffer a decrease: yet little had this beene noted in so vast a store, had not the inuention of building of houses by little and little turned great forrests into Cities; which for the most part owed not only their first originall, but also their daily reparation to Trees and Timber: but aboue all the greatest de∣uourer of Woods and Forrests is Fire, an element fed and nou∣rished almost of no other matter. For to let passe the ordinary vse of fire in euery house and family, which in so infinite a multitude of people, in so many yeeres since the Flood, must require an extraordinary proportion of wood and fuell, how many Arts haue beene since inuented, depending onely vpon this Element? we will goe no farther then the Art of Lique∣faction, fining of gold and other mettals, found out in the bow∣els of the Earth, wherein the couetousnesse of men hath been as vnsati ble as the fire. To this which wee haue said, may pro∣bably be opposed two things: first, the power and inclination of euery Creature to multiply and propagate it selfe. Second∣ly, the industry of mankind in seconding that inclination: Whence it may bee coniectured that great woods should by durance increase to a greater quantity: for the former, no man will deny, but that plants and trees left to themselues, will commonly propagate their kind: neuerthelesse it cannot pre∣uaile so much as the other, which procure the decrease: first because the Earth being dryer now, then soone vpon the Flood, cannot so much further the growth of vegetals as then it did: Secondly, because (as wee haue said) this growth in a populous Countrey, cannot bee so great as the diminution, since few or no houses can want so necessary an Element as fire. To the second wee answer that mans industry hath done somewhat in plantation of groues, and such like: but how little is this in comparison of the huge and vast forrests in time by man wasted and consumed. We shall read of Germany, that in the time of Caesar it seemed a wilde Countrey, hauing many great woods and forrests, but few Cities: but now the case be∣ing altered, we shall find the Cities both in number and great∣nes increased, and the Woods diminished. Two instances may suffice, the one of the Forrest of Ardenna in Lutzemburg, ac∣compted in Caesars time 500 miles ouer, now scarce 50. The other of Sylua Hyrcinia, which heretofore (if we beleeue Hi∣stories) reached so far as a man could trauaile in 60 dayes; but now is made the onely limit or bound diuiding Bohemia from the rest of Germany. The like may bee obserued almost of eue∣ry other Countrey reduced to ciuility. 2 Places moderatly situated towards the North or South Pole abound more in Woods then neere the Equatour. This situation wee vnderstand to comprehend almost all the temperat Zone, reaching either way so farre as 60 degrees or there about. The demonstration of this Theoreme depends of these two foments of all plants, Heat and Moisture; both which concurre, not only to the abundance and fertility, but also to the greatnesse of all plants; for it is most certaine that wheresoeuer these two vitall succours are wanting or defici∣ent, there must be a great scarcity of trees, fruits, herbage, and such like: This is the cause why the Regions far North neere about the Pole, beyond 60 degrees, haue not onely scarcity of trees, but haue them such as are, of a farre smaller quantity then other Regions, lying more temperate: For the internall and naturall heat is almost extinguished, with the extremity of cold, and the moisture (as it were) dried vp by the frosty dis∣position of the Region. To this cause may wee ascribe, that which Geographers haue deliuered concerning Island, that for want of Timber they couer their houses with fish-bones, digging out houses in the sides of Rockes and mountaines. Moreouer that the meere defect of moisture may cause a scar∣city of growth, may bee proued by many places: 1 because temperate Regions, which are Mountainous and lying higher, produce trees of small length; Bodin testifies as a thing very remarkeable, that hee hath obserued oakes in France not ex∣ceeding 3 or 4 feet. But this is no great wonder with vs in England: sith in the dry and barren plaines about Salisbury there are many examples not much different: All which, we can ascribe to no other cause then the want of moisture. On the other side as great or greater a defect of heat & moisture, is found neere the Equatour, by reason of the externall heat of the Sunne; which in all plants and vegetalls, not onely euapo∣rates the moisture, and by consequence causeth drowth; but by the extraction of Internall heat, leaueth a greater cold be∣hind, correspondent to that humour in a man, which we call Melancholy and choler-adust: But this extremity of heat cau∣sing this defect of internall heat & moisture, wee place not di∣rectly vnder the Equinoctiall; because we haue shewed it to be more temperate: but rather vnder the Tropicks, which by experience are found scorched with great heat. How subiect these places vnder the Tropickes are to this sterility, we need goe no farther then Libia and Numidia to confirme; Places by the report of trauailers, indigent not onely of Woods and Trees, but almost of all vitall succours. Whereas the Woods & Forrests dispersed almost in euery region of Europe, and the more temperate parts of Asia, are celebrated of all writers. Yet whereas wee haue defined the chiefest places for the growth of Woods to be towards the North, so farre as 60 de∣grees or there-abouts; wee cannot warrant this as an absolute generall obseruation; because some places lying very low, and subiect to much moisture, though situat more Southerly, may enioy this proportion, as we haue formerly shewed of trees neere the Riuer Hiarotis recorded by Strabo, to haue their noone shadowes of 5 furlongs, as also of certaine trees in A∣merica neere Riuo Negro, wherein (as Peter Martyr writes) a King dwelt with all his family. But these places howsoeuer situat towards the South are (as Geographers deliuer vnto vs) most times of the yeere ouerwhelmed with Water, consisting all of marish grounds: yet these few instances drawne from the particular disposition of the Earth it selfe, cannot much impeach our proposition, which takes notice only of the situa∣tion of the Earth, in respect of the cardinall points of North and South, compared with the Heauens. CHAP. XI. 1 H Itherto haue we treated of the Ab∣solute adiuncts of the land; we are now to speak of the Relatiue, which imply a respect of the Land to the Sea. 2 From this Termination of the land with the sea, there ariseth a twofold distinction: The first is of the land into Continent and Ilands. 3 A Continent is a great quantity of land consi∣sting of many Kingdomes and Regions, not diuided by Water, the one from the other: An Iland is a parcell of land compassed round with the sea. An Iland is called in Latin Insula, quasi in salo ; because it stands in the Sea; some would haue it in English termed an I∣land, as it were, Eye of the land: But this deriuation seemes affected and not naturall: it might seeme more naturally to be deriued from the French L'Isle. But wee will not dispute of the name: It is enough to vnderstand, that an Iland is a porti∣on of the habitable Earth, euery where enuironed with the sea, orat least with some great Riuer: but this last sense seemes more improper then the other; yet oftentimes vsed, as Meroe in Africa an Iland of Nilus, and the Iland of Eely in England. To this is opposed the Continent, as that land, which being not diuided and separated by the sea, containes in it many Empires and Kingdomes, as Europe, Asia, Africke, Ameri∣ca ; all which, as farre as wee can yet gather, are vnited and ioyned together, in one continuate land; Strabo affirmes out of this in his 1 Boooke and first Chapter of Geographie, that the whole Earth is one Iland ; sith all these knowne parts of the Earth, are compassed about with the sea on euery side: But this opinion cannot stand with reason, or moderne obserua∣tion: First, because this acception is too large; for as much as an Iland is properly taken for a smaller part, diuided from the rest of the land, and opposed to the Continent ; whereas if this sense were admitted, the distinction of land into Continent and Iland would haue no place, or at least the same in a diuerse respect, might bee called a Continent and an Iland. But it is plaine that Ilands were alwayes opposed to the continent, to which, although separate by Water, they were supposed to belong, as to Europe, Asia, Africke, America, or Magella∣nica, or some other as Geographers haue reduced them. Se∣condly, because it was a bold coniecture to thinke the whole world to consist only of those parts, found out in Strabos time: For besides the two parts of America since that time discoue∣red by Columbus, another great portion is since that time found out in the South, by the coniecture of Ferdinando de Quir, comming neere the quantity of Europe, Asia, and A∣frica. Which howsoeuer it be round enuironed with sea, and th refore might seeme an Iland, yet in respect of the greatnes of it, and the many regions and kingdomes it containes, it may well bee reputed a continent: To which many lesser Ilands belong. 1 It is probable that Ilands were not from the first creation, but were made afterwards either by the vniuersall deluge, or some other violence of the Water. It hath been the opinion of diuerse learned men, that Ilands wer not onely before the Flood, but from the first creation of the world: because they seeme no lesse to make for the orna∣ment of the Earth, then diuers Lakes and Riuers dispersed on the Land. But this argument seemes very weake first because a greater ornament seemes to consist in vniformity then con∣fusion▪ besides, the ornament must not bee measured by our phantasie, but Gods Almighty pleasure and will expressed in his owne workmanship: and that hee created Ilands in the be∣ginning, is the thing in question. That Ilands were not from the Creation, many probable reasons are alleaged: First rom the words in the 1 of Genesis: Dixit verò Deus, congregentur aequae quae sub coelo sunt, in locum vnum, & appareat arida: & factum est ita; & vocauit Deus aridam, terram; congregatio∣nes{que} Aquarum appellauit maria. By which may be collected▪ that the waters were gathered together in their own place, by themselues, and therefore had no such intercourse betwixt Land and Land as now they haue, admitting Ilands: where∣fore it is more probable▪ that such Ilands as now appeare were either caused by that Vniuersall Deluge of Noah, or by some other Accidents: for it is most certaine that the Sea on the Land some-where gaines, and other-where in recompence of it, it looseth againe: as may appeare by the 14 of Genesis ; where it is said of the comming together of certaine Kings: Hi omnes conuen runt in vallem Syluestrem, quae nunc est mare salis; out of which it is euident that that parcell of ground which was a woody place in the time of Abraham, was be∣fore the time of Moses become the Salt Sea. Many examples of the like are giuen vs by Pliny in his Naturall History, which we shall haue occasion to vrge hereafter: And therefore it is no hard thing to belieue, that since the first beginning of the world all Ilands might bee produced in this sort. Another ar∣gument by which they would stablish this opinion, is that wee see almost all Ilands of the Earth not onely inhabited of mankind, but also furnished with diuerse kindes of Beasts, some tame, some wilde, some wholesome, some venomous, some vsefull, some altogether vnprofitable. Now it seemes very vnlikely that men b ing in elder times, and now also in most places of the Earth, altogether vnskilfull in the Art of Nauigation, should venture so farre on the maine Ocean, to people Countreyes so far distant; sith at this day, wherein Na∣uigation is arriued at a great perfection, hauing the helps both of the Chart and Compasse, altogether vnknowne vnto the an∣cients, wee see most Nations very scrupulous in searching out farre remote Countreyes. But admit this were ouercome by mans Industrie, which no doubt is much increased by Neces∣sity; yet cannot it bee very probable, that so many sundry kindes of beasts should in this sort bee transported: for how∣soeuer wee coniecture concerning such beasts as necessarily serue for mans sustenance; yet seemes it hard to thinke that man should bee so improuident and enuious to the place of his own Habitation as to transport rauenous, venomous, vnwhole∣some, and vnprofitable creatures: for by no other me nes but by transportation can such beasts bee imagined to bee brought into Ilands: For the first originall of all creatures in the Crea∣tion was in or neere Paradice, which wee shall proue to haue been n the Continent of Asia ; the second Seminary was in the Arke, which by the testimony of the Scriptures was first disburthened in the same Continent. How from hence they should spread themselues into Ilands, is the doubt. Impossi∣ble it seemes they should swimme so far; for what Creature will venture it selfe on the maine Ocean being by a naturall instinct fearefull of death, and carefull of his owne preseruati∣on: Whence it is more likely to imagine, that these parcels of land being first furnished with such creatures, were after∣wards by the violence of the flood, or some other like Acci∣dent, torne off from the maine Continent, retaining still such Creatures as it had before. But here S. Augustine seeme to a∣uoid this Argument two wayes: It is not (saith he) incredi∣ble, that wild and sauage beasts might bee transported from one Countrey to another by Sea: either by Men for the de∣light of Hunting; or else by the helpe of Angels by Gods Commandement, or at least permission. This answer seemes very probable as well for it selfe, supposing nothing impossi∣ble to Almighty God, as also for the authority of the Author. But with all reuerence to the Authour, whom all the Christi∣an Churches are bound to honour, this assertion is not so strong∣ly fortified to enforce assent. And first it is not very likely that pleasure with men should so farre ouersway the generall weale and profit, as to transport so many rauenous and hurt∣full beasts, for meere hunting sports and recreation. Second∣ly, the chase of some, as Lions, Leopards, and such like, hath more danger in it then sport or delight; and if so be these were conueyed ouer Sea for such ends, yet it is very probable, they would keepe them rather close and imprisoned to serue occasion, then to let them loose and free for farther propaga∣tion. Finally, whereas hee ascribes the transportation of them to the ministery of Angels; no man can deny but this may bee possible; because by their permission of Almighty God they might effect greater matters. Yet seemes this not so likely as the other, because wee finde that in the generall preseruation of all creatures in the Arke, hee vsed the ordinary helpe of Naturall meanes, although directed and assisted by a Diuine power: And of God effected greater matters in this sort, why may wee not belieue it of things of lesser moment and neces∣sity? But of this wee haue spoken before. Another reason for our opinion that Ilands were not before the flood, or at least from the Creation, is vrged by Verstegan a late Writer in this manner: There is nothing broken) (saith he) that hath not bin whole; which he sets downe as an infallible principle: for howbeit Nature doth sometimes against her own intent com∣mit some errours, in so much as the things formed haue either too much, or too little; yet bringeth she forth nothing broken or disseuered; but such as it is, it is alwayes whole and not broken, except afterwards by some accident. And if Nature, the hand-maide of God, neuer misseth this perfection, much more ought wee to belieue that God the Father of Nature in the first Creation left no part thereof broken and vnperfect. But euery man may see by ordinary obseruation, that the Clifts and bounds of the Sea (as not being by God in the crea∣tion so formed) seeme not onely seuered and broken, but (as it were) cut streight and steep downe from the top to the bot∣tome, not stooping or declining by degrees; as wee see in In∣land Hills in their descent vnto the valleyes. The forceable breach of the land (as wee pretend) by the Sea fretting through some narrow place, seemes the more to be confirmed in that we find it not steep towards the Land, where the Land declines by a sloping descent as in other places; but rather to∣wards the Sea in such sort, as both the sides of a narrow and streite Sea oftentimes in the nature of the soile, and conformi∣ty of figure, seeme to answer one other; onely shewing the want of substance betwixt them which is lost. It may hence be obiected that many other hills and rocky places of Iland Countreyes▪ seeme in like manner as broken and steep downe at these clifts bounding the Ocean: as also that the clifts tow∣ards the Sea are broken higher vp then any waies the Sea could be imagined to ascend. To this wee answer, first that rocks on the dry land many times seeme broken, when indeed they are not, being by Nature fashioned craggie and vneuen: Second∣ly, whereas Hills in Inland countries seeme broken, this might proceede heretofore by Earthquakes which haue oftentimes beene obserued to produce such effects as it hath lately beene knowne to doe in a Towne called Pleurs in the Grisons Coun∣trey neere the Alpes: and for the appearance of such breaches in the tops of clifts aboue the ascent of the waters, it might bee caused by the violence of the Sea-waues, fretting and eating out the sides of them beneath the bottome; whence it hap∣pens that the higher part for want of vnder-propping must needes fall and breake off from the other. This Argument of our said Authour is by him back't with another, drawne from the name of a cliffe, which in our ancient language is drawne from cleauing or breaking off: which appellation is neuer gi∣uen to our Inland Hils, but only to such as terminate and com∣passe in the Sea. These reasons make the matter seeme proba∣ble; yet condemne I not the other as absurd, because it may prob bly be defended, and backt with the authority of many graue Authors. 4 A second Distinction ariseth out of the ter∣mination of the Land with the Sea: For ei∣ther it is vniforme or various. 5 An vniforme termination I call that which without any notable difference inclines more to euennesse and Regularity. It is manifest that the Sea-wawes working on the Land vi∣olently, and not naturally, seldome or neuer so bound and com∣passe the Land, as to reduce it to a regular and perfect figure. But yet because in some places it comes somewhat neere to such a figure, somewhere it is very farre off; wee thought it fit to insert this distinction. This inclination to a Regular figure is some-where square, consisting of Right-lines, some-where circular; an example of the former we haue in Spaine, which on the North-side, and the West is bounded more streitly, com∣ming neere a right-line: of the other in Africk , whose North-West side from the Mediterranean streits to Guinea seemes in some sort circular. 6 A various Termination is that wherein the bounds are crooked, and as it were inden∣ted with crekes and turnings. Here three things are remarkeable. 1. Peninsula, Istmus, and Promontorium. 7 A Peninsula is a part of land euery where en∣uironed with the sea, excepting in one part, where it is knit vnto the maine land: An Ist∣mus is a narrow land betwixt two seas: A Promontorie is a high mountaine bending it selfe into the sea: the head whereof is called a Cape: These three are remarkeable accidents growing out of the Termination of the land with the sea, and belonging as well to continents as Ilands. The first we call Peninsula, quasi penè Insula, termed of the Graecians Chersonesus, although I find this name oftner giuen to the Istmus then the Peninsula. A∣mongst the Peninsula's the most famous are Africa, Scandia, Taurica Chersonesus, Peloponnesus, and America Peruana. That little parcell of land which ioynes this Peninsula with the maine land, we call an Istmus, which is a narrow necke of land betwixt two seas, ioyning two Continents; such as are Istmus Corinthiacus and Istmus Cimbricus: more famous are those two narrow lands, whereof the one lyeth betwixt Peru∣ana, and Mexico in America, the other diuiding Africke from Asia. A Promontorie is a great mountaine stretching it selfe far into the sea: whose extremity is called a Cape or Head, of which the most remarkeable are the Cape of good hope in A∣fricke, 2. The Cape of S. Vincent in Portugall, 3. The Cape of Comary in Asia. 4. The Cape de la Victoria in America. Our obseruation concerning this distinction shall bee comprised in this Theoreme. 1 Peninsula's by the violence of the sea fret∣ting through the Istmus, haue oftentimes beene turned into Ilands ▪ and contrariwise some∣times Peninsula's by diminution of the sea made of Ilands. This proposition is not hard to proue, if any credit ought to bee g uen to ancient writers: for it is commonly related, that Sicily was heretofore ioyned to Italy, Cyprus to Syria, Euboea with Boeotia, Besbicum with Bythinia ; all which at this day are Ilands separated and diuided from the continent. The like hath beene coniectured of our Brittany, which some imagi∣ned heretofore to haue beene ioyned with the continent of France, about Douer and Calais: as may seeme probably to be gathered out of the correspondency of the Cliffs (whereof we haue spoken in this chapter before) the agreement of the soyle, the smalnesse of the distance, and many more arguments remembred by vs else-where. Also it hath beene obserued on the other side, that the sea in some places leauing his anci∣ent bounds, hath ioyned some Ilands to the land, making Pe∣ninsulas of Ilands. In this sort if wee belieue antiquity was Antissa ioyned to Lesbos, Zephirium to Halicarnassus, Ethusa to Mindus, Promiscon to Miletum, Narthucusa to the Pro∣montory of Parthenius: In these antiquities it behooues euery man to iudge without partiality, according to reason, not as∣cribing too much to fabulous narrations, wherein those ages did abound▪ neither yet shewing himselfe too incredulous: For as much as we cannot charge these Authors with any ma∣nifest absurdity. The speciall and particular arguments by which wee should establish our assertion, wee must according to the rules of method reserue to the speciall part, where we shall treat ofspeciall Countreyes. CHAP. XII. 1 O F the perpetuall Accidents of the land, we haue spoken somewhat: it remaines in this place wee treat of the Casuall. 2 The casuall I call such as happen not ordi∣narily at all times: such as are Inundations and Earth-quakes. 3 An Inundation is an ouerwhelming of the land by Water. Howsoeuer it bee certaine out of holy Scriptures, that God hath set the sea his certaine bounds and limits, which it can∣not passe: yet the same God sometimes to shew his speciall iudgement on some place or age, hath extraordinarily per∣mitted the sea sometimes to breake his appointed limits, and inuade the Iurisdiction of the land. This wee call a Deluge or Inundation. The inundations which euer haue been obserued on the Earth, are of two sorts, either Vniuersall or particular: An vniuersall is that whereby the whole face of the Earth is couered with water; whereof we haue onely two examples: The first was in the first creation of the world, when (as wee read in the Scriptures) the whole face of the Earth was round inueloped with Water, which couered the tops of the highest mountaines, till such time as God by a supernaturall hand, made a separation of the Waters from the dry land: But this is improperly called an Inundation, because, the same properly taken implies as much as an ouer-flowing of that which was dry land before: The second (as we read in Gene∣sis ) happened in the time of Noah, when God for the sinne of man, drowned the whole world, breaking open the cataracts of Heauen, and loosing the springs of the deepe. Particular inundations are such, as are not ouer the whole Earth, but in some particular places or regions; Such a deluge (according to Genebrardus ) happened in the time of Enos, wherein a third part of the Earth was drowned. The like i spoken of Ogyge King of Athens, that in his time happened a very great Inundation, which drowned all the confines and coasts of At∣tica and Achaia euen to the Aegean sea: In which time it was thought that Buras and Helice Cities of Achaia, were swal∣lowed vp: whereof Ouid in his Metamorphosis, speakes thus. Si quaeras Helicen & Buran Achaidos vrbes. Inuenies sub aquis: Buras and Helice on Achai n ground Are sought in vaine, but vnder seas are found. As famous was the Inundation of Thessaly in Deucalions time mentioned not onely by profane writers and Poets, but also by S. Augustin, Ierom, and Eusebius, which would haue it to happen in the time of Cranaus, who next after Cecrops go∣uerned Athens. This inundation was exceeding great, exten∣ding it selfe not onely ouer all Thessaly and the regions adioy∣ning westward, but ouerwhelmed the greatest part of Italy. The same or other happening neere the same time, oppressed Aegypt, if Eusebius may obtaine credit. Hence some would haue the people of Italy to haue been called Vmbrij (as Pliny and Solinus report) quia ab imbribus diluuij superfuissent. But this Etymologie seemes too farre fetcht. There are also two o∣ther notable Inundations mētioned by ancient writers, which fell out in Aegypt from the Riuer of Nilus, whereof the first couered all the neither Aegypt, which was subiect to Prome∣theus, and hence (as Natalis Comes obserues) was the fable drawne of the vulture lighting on Prometheus liuer, after∣wards slaine by Hercules. For (as Diodorus Siculus obserues) the Riuer Nilus for the swiftnes of his course was in ancient time called an Eagle. This Riuer afterwards did Hercules by his great kill and iudgement streiten and bound▪ reducing it into narrow channels: whence some Greeke Poets turning Hercules labours into fables, faigned that Hercules slew the Eagle which sed on Prometheus brest, meaning that hee deli∣uered Prometheus out of that sorrow and losse which hee and his people sustained by that Inundation. The second of these Egyptian flouds happened about Pharus in Egypt, where A∣lexander the great built Alexandria. To these may bee added many more of lesser moment, as well in ancient times as in our dayes: As that of Belgia in some parts mentioned before, on another occasion; and not many yeeres since in some parts of Somerset-shire with vs in Britanny. 1 No vniuersall Inundation of the Earth can be Naturall: The other may depend on some Natu∣rall causes. Of the causes of Inundations many disputes haue beene a∣mongst Naturall Philosophers: some haue trusted so farre to Nature, that they haue ascribed not only particular Inundati∣ons, but that vniuersall Deluge in the time of Noah to second causes: of this opinion was Henricus Mecliensis a Schollar of Albertus Magnus, who in his Commentaries vpon the great Coniunctions of Albumazar, obserued that before Noahs flood, chanced a coniunction of Iupiter and Saturne in the last degree of Cancer, against the constellation since termed Ar∣go's ship : out of which he would needs collect, that the floud of Noah might haue beene fore-showne; because Cancer is a watry signe, and the house of the Moone being mistrisse of the Sea, and all moist bodyes according to Astrologie: which opinion was afterwards confirmed by Petrus de Alliaco, who affirmes in his Comment vpon Genesis, that although Noah did well know this flood by diuine Reuelation; yet this con∣iunction being so notable, hee could not bee ignorant of the causes thereof; for those were not only signes, but also appa∣rant causes by vertue receiued from the first cause, which is God himselfe. Further to confirme this assertion hee would haue Moses by the cataracts of Heauen, to haue meant the the great & watry coniunction of the Planets. A reason wher∣of hee seemes to alleage, because it is likely that God would shew some signe in the Heauens, by which all men might be warned to forsake their wicked courses. But notwithstanding this curious opinion, I rather cleaue to those which thinke this Deluge to be meerely Supernaturall, which I am induced to belieue for diuers causes vrged by worthy writers. First, be∣cause this is set downe in Holy Scripture for a chiefe token or marke of Noahs extraordinary faith & dependance vpon Gods promises: which had been much diminished, and of small mo∣ment, had it any way been grounded on the fore-sight of se∣cond causes. For this was no more then might haue beene dis∣couered to the rest of the wicked worldlings, who no doubt would in some sort haue prouided for their safety, had they receiued any firme perswasion of this dreadfull Deluge. To which others adde a second reason, that second causes of them∣selues, without any change or alteration, are not able to pro∣duce such an admirable effect as the drowning of the whole World: for it is not conuenient (say they) that God the Au∣thor of Nature should so dispose and direct the second causes, that they might of themselues bee able to inuert the order of the Vniuerse, and ouer-whelme the whole Earth, which hee gaue man for his habitation. But this reason is thought very weake, for as much as it seemeth to imply a new creation: The conceit of a new Creation is pronounced by a learned Coun∣treyman of ours, both vnlearned and foolish: for whereas it is written (saith hee) that the fountaines of the deepe were broken open, it cannot otherwise be vnderstood, then that the waters forsooke the very bowels of the Earth, and all whatso∣euer therein was dispersed made an eruption through the face of the Earth. Now if wee compare the height of the waters in this deluge aboue the highest mountaines, being onely 15 cubits, with the depth of the semi-diameter of the Earth to the Center, we shall not find it impossible, answering reason with reason, that all these waters dispersed vnder the Earth▪ should so far extend as to drowne the whole Earth: for the semi-dia∣meter of the Earth (as Astronomers teach) is not aboue 35 miles, wherein the waters contained and dispersed, may bee sufficient for the hight of the greatest mountaines, which neuer attaine 30 miles vpright: whereas this distance of 30 miles is found in the depth of the Earth 116 times. Secondly, the ex∣tension of the Ayre being exceeding great, it might please God to condensate and thicken a great part thereof, which might concurre to this Inundation. We willingly assent to the wor∣thy Authour, that this Inundation might bee performed with∣out any new creation: Notwithstanding we cannot hence col∣lect that it was Naturall. But to compose the difference the better, and to shew how far Nature had a hand in this admira∣ble effect, we will thus distinguish; that an effect may be cal∣led Naturall two manner of wayes: First, in regard of the causes themselues: Secondly in respect of the Direction and Application of the causes. If we consider the meere secondary and instrumentall causes, wee might call this effect Naturall, because it was partly performed by their helpe and concur∣rence. But if we consider the mutuall application and coniun∣ction of these second causes together with the first cause, which extraordinarily set them a worke, we must needs acknowledge it to be supernaturall. For other particular Inundations in par∣ticular Regions we may more safely terme them Naturall, as directed and stirred vp by second causes, working no other∣wise, then according to their owne naturall disposition. Two causes concurring together, are here most notable, whereof the first is the great coniunction of watry Planets working on the water their proper subiect: the other the weaknes of the bounds and banks restraining the water, which by processe of time weare out and suffer breaches: both these causes some∣times concurring together, cause an Inundation: which asser∣tion wee may lawfully accept, but with this caution, that Al∣mighty God working by second causes, neuerthelesse directs them oftentimes to supernaturall and extraordinary ends. 2 Particular alterations haue happened to Bounds of Regions by Particular Inundations. Howsoeuer some inundation haue not continued long, but after a small time le t the Earth to her owne possession; yet others haue been of such violence, as they haue beene found to haue fretted away, or added, and so altered the bounds and limits of places: which besides diuerse examples produced by vs, in our former chapter. Aristotle seemes to acknowledge in the 1 booke ofhis Meteors, the 14 Chapter, where he saith, that by such Accidents sometimes the Continent and firme land is turned into the Sea, and other-where the Sea hath re∣signed places to the Land: for sith the agitation or mouing of the water depends ordinarily vpon the vertue of Heauenly bodyes, if it should happen that those Starres should meet in coniunction, which are most forceable and effectuall for stir∣ring vp of Tempests and Flouds, the Sea is knowne to rage be∣yond measure, either leauing her ancient bounds, or else vsur∣ping new. By this meanes (as we haue shewed in the former Chapter) some Ilands haue been ioyned to the Land, and some Peninsula's separated from the Land, and made Ilands: some∣where the Sea hath beene obserued for a great space to leaue the Land naked, as Verstegan coniectures of the most part of Belgia, which hee sayes, was in ancient time couered with water; which besides many other arguments hee labours to proue out of the multitude of fish-shells, and fish-bones, found euery-where farre vnder ground about Holland, and the coasts thereabouts, which being digged vp in such abun∣dance, and from such depthes, could not (saith hee) proceed from any other cause then the Sea, which couered the whole Countrey, and strewed it with fishes. Lastly, that the Sea might seeme as well to get as lose, shee hath shewed her power in taking away and swallowing vp some Regions and Cities, which before were extant: Such fortune had Pyrrha and Antis a about Meotis, Helic and Bura before mentioned in the Corinthian straites: some haue beene of opinion that the whole Mediterranean within Hercules pillars, was in time past habitable land, till it gaue way to the violency of the Seas inuasion: But in this I credit nothing without farther ground. The like vncertainties are also related of the Atlantick Ilands, greater then all Africa, swallowed vp of the Ocean: which Columbus was said in a sort to haue discouered in the Sea, fin∣ding a great shallow fraught with weedes, where he supposed this great Iland to haue stood. But I rather beleeue that this Atlanticke Iland spoken of by Plato, was either a Poeticall fi∣ction, as Moores Vtopia with vs, or at least the Continent of America perhaps in those dayes obscurely discouered, but the discouery lost againe to after ages. 3 Certaine Regions by reason of great Riuers are subiect to certaine Anniuersary Inundati∣ons, which commonly happen betwixt the Tro∣picks in the Summer, without the Tropicks in the Winter. The former clause is proued by experience almost in all great Riuers in the world, which at some times of the yeere swell higher, ouerflowing their bankes, and drowning a part of the land about them. But this happens not alike in all places; for in Riuers included within the Tropicks, as Nilus & Niger in A∣frica, and Oregliana in America with others there-about, this Anniuersary Inundation, is in the Sūmer, else-where it is com∣monly in the Winter. For the former these causes may be assig∣ned; 1 The melting of the snow on the tops of the great moū∣taines in those parts, which is greatest of all, when the Sun is neerest or verticall vnto them, which we are to accompt their Summer. 2 The daily raines & showres such Regions are sub∣iect vnto; These showres are much more frequent & greater when the Sun is neerest their verticall point or in it: The rea∣son whereof we haue formerly shewed to bee this: That the Sun daily in those parts drawes vp more vapours, then he can dissipate & consume: Whence meeting with the cold of the middle Region of the Aire they are condensated into drops, & so turned into raine. For the later case in riuers situat without the Tropicks, cōmonly happens the contrary, to wit, that such Inundations happen rather in the winter then in the Summer, whereof these reasons may bee rendred. 1 Because Raine ▪ and showres whereof such ouer-flowing are ingendred in those parts, are more frequent in winter then in the Summer. 2 whereas neere the Equatour, the snow is known to melt with the Sunne from the tops of high Mountaines, in other parts it seldome or neuer melts at all, (as may bee thought (vnder the Pole or thereabouts; or else, if it melt, it happens, (as in the temperat Zones we see it doth) oftner by raine, then the heat of the Sunne. 4 Next are we to speake of Earthquakes : An Earthquake is a sensible motion and shaking of the parts of the Earth. Amongst other remarkeable affections of a place, which are not so ordinary, an Earthquake hath no small considera∣tion, being oftentimes a meanes which God vseth to shew some great and extraordinary iudgement. But not to spend more on this subiect then may seeme meete for Geography ▪ wee will shew the causes and kindes of it, by which we may the sooner come to learne what Regions and places of the Earth are most subiect to this affection, which is necessary of a Cosmographer to bee knowne. Concerning the cau es of it, much dispute hath been among Philosophers: some haue ridi∣culously affirmed, that the Earth is a liuing creature, and sup∣pose with no lesse, if not greater ab urdity, that the Earth be∣ing in good temper, doth rest & settle quietly according to her naturall disposition: From which temper if she be any way re∣moued, as if she were sicke, or pain'd in some part, she shakes and shiuers. The relation of this opinion is a sufficient confuta∣tion. Thales Milesius would haue the Earth as a shippe to swimme on the Waters, which being sometimes as a vessell by tempests turned on one side too much, it takes a great quantity of water, which is the cause of Earthquakes: But this opinion is a poeticall fiction. Little more probable is the opinion of Democritus, that the Earth drinking in raine wa∣ter more then her cauernes can well containe, the water re∣uerberated backe is cause of such a motion: But who can ima∣gine that drops of raine falling into the Earth can bee reuerbe∣rated backe, with such violence to cause such an extraordina∣ry motion of the Earth? Anaximenes Milesius was of opinion that the Earth her selfe was cause of her own motion; for the parts of it being taken out (as it were) and broken, fall downe sometimes into a great depth, causing the vpper face of it to shake and tremble; to which opinion also Seneca seemes to subscribe in the sixt booke of his naturall questions the 10 chapter; To which also accords the Philosophicall Poet Lu∣cretius in these words. Terra superna tremit magnis concussa ruinis, Subter vbi ingentes speluncas subruit aetas, Quippe cadunt toti montes, magno{que} repentè Concussu la è dispergunt inde Tremores, Et meritò; quoniam plaustris concussu tremiscunt Tecta viam propter non magno pondere tota. The vpper Earth seaz'd with great ruines shakes, When surrowed age her vast ribbes ouertakes. For mountaines great fall downe, and with the blow The Tremblings are dispersed to and fro. Not without reason; when a small-siz'd waine Makes houses neere the way to shake amaine, This last opinion seemes to carry more shew ofprobabi∣lity then the former; neither can any man deny, that some∣times the Earth in some parts, may shake by the breaking downe of some subterranean parts, whose suddain and violent motion may cause the rest being continuate to entertaine the like conuulsion. But yet more generall seemes the opinion of Aristotle who would haue Earthquakes to proceed from a spi∣rit or vapour included in the bowells of the Earth, as he testi∣fies in the 2 of his Meteors the 7 chapter. For this vapour finding no way to passe out, is enforced to returne backe; and batred any passage out, seekes euery corner: and while it la∣bours to breake open some place for going forth, it makes a tumultuous motion, which is the Earth-quake. Now least it should seeme improbable that so great a masse of Earth should bee moued, and shaken, by so thinne and rarefied a body as is a fume or vapour; Aristotle in the same place shewes the admirable force of Winds as well vpon the Aire, as on the bodies of liuing creatures: In the Aire ; because experience shewes that being stirred vp by a Windy vapour it sometimes is knowne to moue rockes from one place to another, to plucke vp trees and shrubbs by the rootes; and sometimes to throw downe the strongest and most stately buildings: In mans body, because by the stirring vp and agitation of the spirits, which are the Instruments of vitall and animall functions, sometimes one sicke man can doe that, which cannot bee performed by many stronger and abler men; as it hath beene tried some∣times, that a Franticke man hath broken very strong chaines, wherwith he hath been bound; which many other men could not doe. Neither on the other side, can it seeme strange, that many and great exhalations, vapours, and spirits should be in∣gendred vnder the Earth; For as much as the Earth is hea ed many wayes. Many wayes may bee specified whence such fumes should arise; as, first, from the Sunne and Starres; Se∣condly, from the subterranean fires hid in the bowels of the Earth; Thirdly, in the winter-time by an Antiperistasis, the heat collecting it selfe downeward to the inner parts of the Earth, which was before in the outward parts of it: The ar∣gument by which Aristotle would confirme this opinion, is drawne as well from the time, as from the places, wherein Earthquakes vsually happen: from the time ; because then most Earthquakes are obserued to bee, when most exhalations are inclosed in the bowels of the Earth; to wit, in the Spring-time and the Autumne. From the places; because, for the most part spongie and hollow Regions, which may drinke in a grea∣ter quantity of exhalations, are commonly most subiect vnto it: for although many exhalations are dayly inclosed in the wombe of the Earth, yet Earthquakes fall but seldome; be∣cause the matter is seldome so strong and violent as to shake the Earth: Wherefore some Philosophers haue expressed three principall wayes which make this Earth-quake: first, when a great quantity of exhalations is suddenly ingendred, which for the greatnesse of it cannot be contained in so little a space: for then being almost choked, it seekes a way to fly forth: Se∣condly, when the Earth is condensated by cold, and driues the exhalation from one place to another, which flying hither and thither, shakes and strikes the Earth: Thirdly, when the exha∣lation, the cold compassing it round by an Antiperistasis, be∣gets heat within it, and so is rarified: for so being vnable any longer to confine it selfe to its former place, it breakes forth, and so shakes the Earth: We must here note by the way, that not onely exhalations are cause of the distemperature in the Earth, but also subterranean fires and windes: all which by some are iudged to bee of equall force in this action: for the diuision of Earthquakes so farre forth as it concernes the diffe∣rence of places, we must vnderstand, that it may be either V∣niuersall or particular: An Vniuersall Earth-quake is that which shakes all the whole Earth in euery part, at least in the vpper face: whereof (I suppose) no naturall cause can be giuen, but the immediate and miraculous power of God: such an Earth-quake happened at the time of our Sauiours Passion, whereof Dydimus a graue and ancient Writer left record. But that which is said to haue happened in the time of Valentinian, mentioned by Orosius in his 7 booke of Histories, & 32 Chap∣ter, is thought by graue Authours to be no vniuersall ▪ Earth-quake, howsoeuer for the large extent of it, it was thought to be generall. A particular Earth-quake is that which is boun∣ded in some one or more particular places, which for the cau∣ses before-alleaged cannot be so far extended, because the ca∣uernes and conuexities of the Earth, where such vapours and exhalations are contained, cannot bee ordinarily so great as to extend to many Kingdomes and Regions. 1 Regions extreame cold or extreame hot are not so subiect to Earth-quakes as places of a Middle temper. The reason is, because in places extreame cold, exhalations are not so soone ingendred, and in so great a quantity as in o∣ther parts: on the other side in places which are extreame hot, the exhalations which are bred, are soone consumed with ex∣cesse of heat: both which may be confirmed by Instances. It is obserued that in the cold Northerne parts (as Olaus Magnus writes in his 10 booke and 13 Chapter) Earthquakes are ve∣ry seldome or neuer: so it is obserued by Pliny in his 2 booke and 18 Chapter: and Albertus Magnus in his 3 booke of M ∣teours tract. 2▪ That places which are very hot, as Egypt, are seldome troubled with this shaking of the Earth: whereas places betwixt both, which are seated in a more temperat cli∣mate, find it not so strange. 1 Hollow and spongie places are more subiect to Earth-quakes then solide and compacted soyles. We must here vnderstand that hollow places are either such as lye open to the Aire, or are hollow onely vnder, and close vpward. The former sort are not at all subiect to the molesta∣tion of Earth-quakes, because the exhalations fly out without impediment: but the latter being more apt to ingender and retaine such matter, must of necessity bee more troubled. This is most plainely obserued in Phrygia, Italia, Caria, Lydia, wherein such motions are more frequent. To confirme this a little farther, wee obserue that hilly and mountainous places, suffer this violence oftner then other parts; because there most commonly cauernes and conca ities are more frequent then in plaine countreyes. But here by the way may bee obie∣cted, that sandy and slimy countryes are many times more free from Earth-quakes then other places: an instance whereof was giuen before in Aegypt, wherein neuer any Earth-quake (as most Authours affirme) or at least but one (as Seneca ) hath beene obserued. The reason may bee giuen, that sandy places without any strife suffer the exhalatiōs to disperse themselues: that slimy places want sufficient receptacles to entertayne them. 3 Ilands are more often troubled with Earth-quakes then the Continent. This haue they found to be true in many Ilands of the Medi∣terranean Sea, and others also; chiefly in Cyprus, Sicylia, Euboea, Tyrus, Angria, Lippora, and the Molucco Ilands betwixt the East and West-Indies. The cause some would haue to bee the Antiperistasis or circumstancy of the waters, which is apt to engender greater store of exhalations in the Earth. But neuer∣thelesse that Ilands are more subiect to Earth-quakes then Continents I dare affirme no otherwise then probable; be∣cause some places in the Continent seeme very much affected, especially in Europe, aboue other places, Constantinople and Basilaea, if we credite authors which haue written of this mat∣ter; in Asia, China, and other Regions adioyning thereunto. CHAP. XIII. 1 T He Naturall affections of the Land haue hitherto beene decla∣red: Wee are in the next place to treate of the Ciuill : Those wee terme Ciuill which concerne the Inhabitants. 2 An Inhabitant is a man dwelling in a cer∣taine place. The name of an Inhabitant (as we haue before noted) may be taken either generally for any liuing creature, residing in a certaine place, in which sense Brute beasts may be called Inha∣bitants ▪ which signification is only metaphoricall: or else for a Reasonable liuing creature, whose abode is setled in any place or Region, in which sense we here take it. The consideration of the Inhabitants we haue reserued for this last Treatise; fol∣lowing as well the methode of the first creation, as of Moses in the narration. For God proceeding in the first Creation accor∣ding to the order of Generation, f om the more vnperfect to the perfect, created not man before such time as he had furni∣shed the Earth with all things agreeable and necessary for his vse; to which alludes the Poet in these Verses. Sanctius his animal mentis{que} capacius altae Deerat adhuc, & quod dominari in caetera possit, Natus homo est.— More sacred and of vnderstanding minde, A creature wants to gouerne euery kinde; So man begunne— Of the Nature, Proprieties, Dignities, and other accidents of this principall creature, there wants no discouery; sith large volumes are stuffed with this theame, and euery man which knowes himselfe can preuent me in this subiect: I will here speake of him so farre forth as hee is an Inhabitant or dweller on the Earth. 3 In the Inhabitants wee are to consider two things: either the Originall, or the Dispo∣sition. 4 The Originall is the off-spring whence all In∣habitants tooke their beginning. Concerning the originall of people of the Earth, wee are to obserue two things; First, the Distinction of originall; Se∣condly, the manner of Inuention: For the first, wee must note that all Inhabitants of the Earth, haue a three-fold originall or beginning. The first was from the first Creation, the second was immediatly after the generall deluge, wherein all the se∣minary of liuing creatures was preserued in the Arke: The third, is the first stocke or originall of each seuerall Nation: For this last, it is a matter which wee cannot here so well de∣fine, till wee come to the particular description of each Regi∣on, to which it properly belongs. It shall bee enough in this generall part, to speake of the two first, as far as approued Hi∣story and Obseruation shall direct vs: For the Manner of fin∣ding out the originall of Nations, these rules are giuen vs by Bodin in his ninth chapter of the methode of History. The first is by the testimony of approued Authors. The second is by the markes and footsteps of Languages. The third may be drawn from the Limits and knowne bounds and situation of Coun∣treyes. This knowledge of the Originall of Nations, hath been a matter of no small importance: For (as Bodin obserues) there is nothing which hath more exercised the wits of Writers, or caused more ciuill discords and ruines of diuerse common∣wealths, then the contention about the first originall of nati∣ons: which iarres and contentions (as I take it) spring from no other ground then the naturall pride in the minds of men, and the affection of Nobility: whereby it often comes to passe, that s ch men as haue risen to grea es, by their Wealth, Villanies, or other such like meanes, haue afterwards, to con∣tinue and bolster vp their vsurped dignities, sought out new pedegrees and Ancesters, to set a glosse vpon their owne base beginnings; a humor in our dayes more affected, then prayse-worthy; not only of priuat persons, but of whole nations, which run far off to seeke out their first originall, which with more ease and certainty, they might find neerer home. To let passe other examples we need goe no farther then the French and the Britanes, both which labour as much as may be, to de∣riue their first originall from the Troians. The first from the li∣nage of Hector, the other from Aeneas ; as if more glory were to be deriued from Troian fugitiues, then from the valiant na∣tion of the ancient Gauls and Germans ; from whom they might der ue a ruer and a more certaine descent. The consi∣deration of this antiquity of nations so far forth as it concernes our Geographicall discourse, reseruing matters of more speci∣alty to our Speciall part, wee will comprise in these Th o∣remes. 1 All Nations had their first originall from one stocke, whence afterwards they became diuided. Wee must here vnderstand (as wee haue before noted) that all Nations haue a threefold originall, the first before the vni∣uersall deluge, the other soone after, the later long after. For the first, no doubt can bee made by such as credit the truth of holy Scriptures, but it was from Adam the first father of man∣kind▪ For the last, it is doubtfull and various, and therefore cannot well bee handled in generall, before wee come to the description of particular countryes; where we are determined to make a search as neere as can be into their originall: But that which we chiefly here note in the second ofspring of mankind soone after the flood: For certaine it is that all mankind was confined to the family of Noah in the Arke, so that their first originall must be drawne from the Arke, and that place where the Arke rested, presently vpon the falling of the wa∣ters: which we shall proue to be far Eastward. Hence is the manifold arrogancy of many nations well discouered; for a∣mongst the Ancients some haue so much affected the antiquity of their race▪ that forgetting their humane condition, they haue deriued their nobility from the Gods. Which humour hath not onely inuaded the minds and affections of foolish and ignorant men, but also of such as haue stood in great opinion & estimation of wisdome and vertue: In so much as Caesar in a certaine oration to the people of Rome, was not ashamed to boast, that he was descended by his Fathers side from the Gods, by his mother from Kings: As also Aristotle deriued his of∣spring from Apollo and Aesculapius: which strange affectati∣on was little lesse in the people of lower and baser condition, who either being vtterly ignorant of their owne ofspring, or at least dissembling it, for the hate they bore to strangers haue called themselues which is as much to say, as a people bred of the same region, not fetching their descent from any othe nation: In which sense Aristides in Panathe∣nai giues the greatest nobility to the Athenians ; to wit that being borne of the Earth the mother of the Gods, they de∣riued not their descent from any other forraine countrey: and this errour is obserued not onely amongst the Ancient, but al∣so with the newer writers, to bee so common, that Poly∣dore Virgill otherwise a prudent writer, affirmes the Britaines to bee a people taking their originall from the Iland Coun∣treyes, and not deriued farther. The like is written by Atha∣merus that the German nation being first bred in Germany owed their originall to no other; Which hee labours to con∣firme out of Tacitus, Sabellicus, and Sepontinus. But (as Bo∣din speakes ingenuously) the ancient might well bee excused in this errour: But these men are subiect to great reprehensi∣on: 1. Because they being Christians seeme to reiect the au∣thority of holy Scriptures, which testifie that all mankind was deriued from the selfe-same originall, being (as wee haue said) all confined in the Arke of Noah. 2 Because by this meanes, giuing to nati ns no other originall, then from their owne country, they distract and diuide each one from the mu∣tuall loue and society of other Nations. For besides many other reasons which moued Moses to write of the Genealogies of people, this one seemes not the least, that men should vnder∣stand themselues to bee all (as it were) kinne, and descended from the same originall; then which there is no greater means to conciliate and ioyne mens affections for mutuall amitie and conuersation. As it is reported of Diomedes and Glaucus and many others, who being armed to one anothers ruine and o∣uerthrow, haue beene drawne to breake off their hatred by the meere pretence and shew of consanguinity. But these who so arrogantly boast themselues to bee Sonnes of the Earth, not beholding to any other countrey for their ofspring, striue to breake in sunder the bonds of society be∣twixt nations, which▪ Gods Word and the Law of Nati∣ons binds vs to obserue. Hence grow those mortall ha∣treds and heart-burnings betwixt diuerse countreyes, as of the Aegyptians, against the Hebrewes, of the Greekes against the Latines, wherein they persecuted one the other extream∣ly. Hence came it to passe that strangers amongst the Romans were called enemies, as the name of Welch-men with the Ger∣mans signifieth as much as a forrainer ; wherein they seeme much to degenerate from the ancient hospitality of their An∣cestors, for which they haue been much praysed▪ Finally from this one root spring those infamous libels cast out of one Nati∣on against another, written by such Fire-brands as delight in nothing more then dissention; but how much better were it to reconcile all people out of this assured ground of consangui∣nity, sith Religion perswades more to Charity and agreement, then to Faction; and contentions. But this I leaue to the Di∣uine, whom it more properly concernes. 2 The first inhabitants of the Earth were planted in Paradise, and thence translated to the places neere adioyning. For the confirmation of this point we need no farther proofe then the authority of God himselfe, speaking in his Word, whereon all truth is grounded; But of the plac of Paradise, where we place the first habitation, sundry disputes haue been amongst Diuines sufficiently examined, of late by a iudicious and worthy Writer in his History of the World. Which tract being too tedious to insert, S r Walter Rawleigh. wee will contract as farre as con∣cernes our purpose. First therefore it would seeme meete that wee examine their opinion, which hold this History of Para∣dise to bee a meere Allegory: Of this opinion were Origen, Philo Iudaeus, Fran. Gregorius with many others: who by the foure riuers of Paradise would haue to be vnderstood the foure Cardinall Vertues: as by the Tree of knowledge, Sapience or Wis∣dome: To which opinion also S. Ambrose Teemes to adhere: who would haue that by Paradise should bee meant the Soule or mind, by Adam the vnderstanding, by Eue the sense, by the Serpent delectation, by the rest of the Trees the vertues of the mind: Against the Fathers themselues I will not inueigh, sith some men suppose their conceits to be rather allusions, then conclusions. But against the opinion it selfe, many reasons may bee drawne to proue there was a true locall Paradise East∣ward: first out of the text it selfe, which saith; For out of the ground made the Lord God to grow euery tree pleasant to the ight, and good for meats: by the processe of which Story it seemes that God first created man out of the garden, as it were in the world at large, and then put him in this garden: the end whereof is expressed to dresse and manure it: Paradise being a garden filled with plants and trees, pleasant to behold, and good for meate: which proueth that Paradise was a ter∣restriall garden. Secondly, to expresse it more plainly, he aver∣reth that it was watred with a riuer springing out of a Region called Eden, being a country neare vnto Canaan in Mesopo∣tania as Ezechiel witnesseth. Thirdly Epiphanius and S t Hie∣rome vrge to this effect; if Paradise were such an Allegory, then were there no Riuers, no place out of which they sprung, no Eue, no Adam, and so the whole History should be turned into a meere fable or poëticall fiction. Fourthly, it is proued by continuation of the same Story: 1 Because God gaue A∣dam free-will to eate of euery tree of the garden (the foresaid tree excepted:) besides he left all the beasts of the Earth to be named by him, which cannot be meant of imaginary trees and beasts: for this were to make the whole Creation aenigmati∣call. 2 ly This name is often vsed in holy Scriptures else-where as in Ezech▪ 10 Genesis 13.19. which would not haue been so, if the whole story had bin meerely Allegoricall, & Paradise an Vtopia ; sith the Scripture, specially the historicall part of them, are written in a plaine stile, fitting the capacity of vul∣gar auditors. Lastly of this Paradise planted in the East, wee may find some footsteps in prophane Poëts, as in Homer, Or∣pheus, Li us, Pindarus, Hesiod, who often speake of Alcinous garden, and the Elisian fields: all which deriued their first in∣uention from this description of Paradise, recorded by Moses in Holy Scripture, whereof the Heathen themselues had some obscure traditions. The second opinion was, that Paradise was the whole Earth, and the Ocean the fountain of these foure ri∣uers; which was defended heretofore by the Manichees, No∣viomagus, Vadianus, and Goropius Becanus. The reasons which they alleage for their part to proue this assertion, were chiefly these. 1 Because those things which were in Scripture attri∣buted to Paradise, are generally ascribed to the whole world, as that place of Genesis; Bring forth fruit and multiply, fill the earth, and subdue it, rule ouer euery creature. But this argument may easi y be answered: for although the world in generall were created for man, and all men descended from the same originall, to wit, the loynes of Adam ; yet this disproueth nothing the particular garden assigned to Adam to dresse, wherein he liued before his transgression: for if there had beene no other choyce, but that Adam had beene left to the vniuersall (as they imagine,) why should Moses say, the garden was East from Eden: sith the world can not be East or West but in respect of particular places? Also why was the Angell set after Adams expulsion to barre his re en∣trance, if it were not a particular place: for according to their opinion Adam should be driuen out of the whole World. Their second reason is, because it semes impossible that Ni∣lus, Ganges, and Euphrates, by so many portions of the world so farre distant, should issue out of the same fountaine. To this we answer, that by common Interpreters of Scripture, being ignorant of Geographie, Pison was falsely taken for Ganges, & Gihon for Nilus : Although it can no way be true that Ganges should be taken for a riuer by Ha ilah in India, and Nilus should runne through Aethiopia, as we shall shew hereafter. The third opinion is, that Paradise is higher then the Moone, or higher at least then the Middle Region of the Aire: this o∣pinion is cast vpon Beda and abanus ; to which also Ruper∣tus seemes to accord: who (as it seemes) borrowed their opi∣nion from Plato, and he from Socrates. But these two (as it seemes) are misinterpreted, Because by Paradise they meant Heauen it selfe as many imagine. But to confirme that this ter∣restriall Paradise is such a place, some men produce these Ar∣guments. First that it is reported by Solinus, that there is a place exceeding delightsome and healthsome on the top of Mount Athos called Acrothones, which being seated about clouds, or raine, or such inconueniences, the people by reason of their long liues are called . Secondly they alleage for the hight of this Paradise, that Enoch was there preserued from the violence of the flood, as Isidore and Peter Lombaard maintaine: But this opinion was of the Diuines condemned in the Florentine counsell: and first where as they say, that such a pleasant place is in the top of the mountaine Athos ; this nei∣ther proues that this is Paradise, neither is it so high as they would haue it: For euery high and pleasant place is not Para∣dise. Secondly, whereas they would haue Enoch and Elias pre∣serued in the place, it is expressely against Holy Scripture, which affirmes directly that the waters ouer-flowed all the mountaines, making no such distinction. Secondly should wee credit this▪ we might as well beleiue that certaine Giants sa∣ued themselues in that high place, as some haue beleiued. Be∣sides the answer of their friuolous arguments, these reasons may bee brought against their assertion: First, that such a place cannot be commodious to liue in: for being so neare the moon, it had also bin too neare the sun. Secondly, because in this sort it had bin too neare a neighbour to the Element of fire. Third∣ly, because (as many hold) the Aire in that Region by the mo∣tion of the heauens is carried about so violently, as nothing there can well consist. Fourthly, because according to Ptolo∣my, the place between the Earth and the Moone is seuenteene times the Diameter of the Earth, which make by a grosse ac∣compt about 120000 miles. Hence it must needs follow that Paradise being lifted vp to this great hight, must haue the compasse of the whole Earth for a basis or foundation. But this cannot be imagined: first, because it would be subiect to the eyes and knowledge of men. Secondly, it would hide the light of the Sunne for the first part of the day being on the East side. Thirdly it would ouer-poize the Earth, and so make it to shrinke out of his place; one side being farre greater and heauier then the other. The fourth conceit is of Tertullian, Bo∣nauenture, and Durandus, who would haue Paradise to bee seated vnder the Aequatour, because that contrary to the o∣pinion of most of all the Ancients, they thought this place to be most pleasant and commodious for habitation. It is true that the places vnder the Aequinoctial are not so burnt with the Sunne as some thought: but, as we haue proued out of latter Nauigators, very pleasant and fruitfull for the most part: yet cannot this be the place of Paradise; for asmuch as the Riuers of Paradise mentioned in holy Scripture, are not found to meet there: which argument might also confute them which thought it was seated vnder the North-pole. The last o∣pinion which I hold the truest, is of some latter Writers, that Paradise was seated in a Region South-east from Mesopota∣nia, which is most amply and copiously proued by S r Walter Rawleigh, to whom I referre my Reader: only two reasons I will alleage. The first from the name of Eden, sith there is found an Iland of this name North-west from the place assig∣ned, very fruitfull & pleasant in all commodities of the Earth, and in later times knowne also by the name of Eden, which is likely to haue been continued from the beginning. Secondly from the Riuers of Paradise, which cannot be imagined to meet in any part of the world: for Tigris and Euphrates it is certaine that they are found in this very Region: for the other Riuer Gihon that it is falsely vnderstood of a Riuer running through Aethiopia is also most certaine; for such a Riuer could neuer meet with Euphrates, which is out of question one of the Riuers of Paradise: for asmuch as it is so farre distāt & diuided from it by the Mediterranean Sea: wherefore I am constrained rather to embrace their opinion which interpret Chut to be a part of Arabia, where Chush the father of Noah se led his first habitation; which for this cause he called after his own name: but afterward in processe of time his posterity growing exceeding large and populous, they were enforced to passe ouer into Africa, and so settle themselues in Aethi∣opia, which place also they called after the same name: as wee haue seene of later yeares the Spaniards at the first discouery of the West Indies called one place Hispaniola, and another Hi∣spania Noua in remembrance of their former habitation. But howsoeuer it be, certain it is, that Paradise was seated in the East, from whence mankind had it's first off-spring And pro∣bable it is that Adam being excluded out of Paradise, was cast into some place neare adioyning thereunto, which may also from our habitable place of the West, be accounted East∣ward. 3 The first plantation of Inhabitants immedi∣atly after the Deluge begunne in the East. As Adam the father of all Nations before the flood began his ofspring in the East, neere Paradise, so the second father of Nations Noah in the East first beganne to repeople the world, after the deluge: Which besides the clearer testimony of holy Scripture, may sundry waies be demonstrated: First, because it is most certaine, that the Earth beganne first to bee peopled, neere the place where the Arke rested, which is the mountaine Ararat: Whether this be a mountaine of Armenia as the cōmon Interpreters imagine, or the mountain Caucasus betwixt Scythia & India, as some later Writers with greater probabilities haue guessed, hath suffered a great dispute; all a∣gree in this that it was Eastward. I will not be here ouer curi∣ous, but refer it to our historicall part, where we shall particu∣larly handle the memorable accidents, of particular places: E∣nough it is to proue that the first plantatiō after the flood was East-ward : 2 ly no small probability is drawne from the ciuili∣ty, magnificence, and populosity of these Easterne nations before others: For it is certaine that many excellent Arts haue flouri∣shed amongst those Easterne people, before euer our westerne climate dreamed of such matters; Amōgst many other matters, Artillery & Printing was in vse amongst the Chinois & East-Indies of ancient time, long before this inuention was known to vs; as the Portugalls who haue trauailed thither haue con∣firmed. To the vse of gunnes and ordinance, many suppose Philostratus to haue alluded, speaking in the life of Apollonius Tiraneus lib: 2. cap: 14. Where he saith that the people dwel∣ling betwixt Hyphasis and Ganges vse not to goe farre to warre, but driue away their enemies with thunder and light∣ning sent downe from Iupiter. By which meanes it is said that Hercules and Bacchus ioyning their forces were there defea∣ted, and that Hercules there cast away his golden shield. For the other Inuention of letters howsoeuer it were by the Grae∣cians ascribed to Cadmus, as the first Inuentour, because he was the man that first discouered it to the Graecians ; it is most certaine that it was as ancient as Seth : And that Printing first came to vs, from this Easterne part, appeares by Iohn Guttem∣berg, who brought it first out of the Easterne world: Which art Conradus being instructed in, brought the practise there∣of to Rome, which afterward one Gesnerus a French-man much bettered and perfected: For howsoeuer amongst the Eu∣ropaeans this inuention seemed but newly borne, yet the Chi∣nois, had it before either the Aegyptians or Phaenicians: When the Graecians had neither knowledg nor ciuility : which is wit∣nessed aboue a hundred yeares gone by the Spaniards and Portugalls. Farther for the magnificence of those nations, an argument may bee drawne from the History of Alexander the great, who found more stately buildings and Cities in the little kingdome of Porus which lay side by side against the East-Indies, then in all his former trauailes: for in Alexanders time learning & ciuility were not spread so farre west as Rome: Neither did he esteeme of Italy any otherwise, then of a bar∣barous and vnciuill place: which made him to turne his army rather against Babilon and the east, which seemed a farre wor∣thier prize: Moreouer, Paulus Venetus shewes that letters and discipline was first borrowed from the easterne people, without any returne of interest. A third reason may bee from the extraordinary strength of those easterne people in most ancient times. For it is reported by Diodorus Siculus out of Clesias that Semiramis the wife of Ninus, not many discents from Noah, brought an army to inuade India ▪ of three milli∣ons, besides horses and waggoners: Neither had Staurobates her aduersary smaller multitudes to encounter her: which ex∣traordinary strength and multitude of men could not possi∣bly issue out of any Colony, sent thither from the westerne parts: And therefore it must needs follow, that they had their first ofspring and originall in those easterne parts neere India. Sundrie other reasons might bee alleaged, but these I sup∣pose will suffice to fortifie this assertion. Then it is manifest that the first Plantation of nations begunne in the easterne parts of the Earth: But where we shall place and define this Easterne part, seemes a matter of greater difficulty then the o∣ther. S r Walter Rawleigh out of the premised arguments would seeme to proue, that this first plantation was farre ast as farre as India, neere which, he would haue the Arke to rest, to wit, on the mountaine Caucasus lying betwixt India & Scythia: Notwithstanding the authority of the learned Au∣thor, I find that the most ancient writers haue drawne the o∣riginal of all nations soone after the flood, from the Caldaeans or at least amongst all, made them the first: For confirmation of which opinion, they vrge many strong arguments: In the first place, they vrge the testimony of Moses in the 11 of Ge∣nesis, where speaking of the first assembly of people after the flood he relates, that they came from the East into the plains of Shinaar, in which place stood Babilon the chiefe seat of the Caldaeans. To this they adde the testimony of Metasthenes, Herodotus, C esias, & Xenophon: which haue afterwards bin seconded by Diogenes, Laertius, Philo, Porphyry in a certaine epistle to Boethus, Clemens Alexandrinus in Stromatis; Euse∣bius de Euangelica demonstratione, Theodoretus lib : 1. de Graeca∣rum affectionum ouratione, Rabbi Moyses Maymonis filius lib: 3. cap. 30. Perplexorum: with almost all the Interpreters of the Hebrewes: All which with vniforme consent haue affir∣med that Ciuility, Arts and sciences, deriued their first descent from the Caldaeans. Hence they faigne that Prometheus being a Caldaean, for that he recalled men from a wilde life to a more ciuill conuersation, and taught the regular motion of the starrs and planets before vnknowne, stole fire from heauen, and a∣nimated men formed out of clay, with a caelestiall soule. But aboue all which may be collected in this kind, no small argu∣ment may bee drawne from the markes and footesteppes of the Hebrew and Chaldy tongues, which in no mixture of tongues, or processe of time could euer be abolished: For this, being the first of all other languages, was preserued by Abra∣ham and his posterity; And challengeth antiquity before e∣uer the Latin or Graecian tongues had any memory: in so much as all the ancient nations of the world are found in most of their originall names of Gods, peoples, Princes, and places to make vse of the Hebrew or Chaldey tongues, differing onely in dialect, which without manifest wresting and absurdity, cannot well be deriued from other latter languages. The first father of the people of Europe was Iaphet the sonne of Noah, according to the ioynt consent of Hebrewes, Graecians, and Latines▪ To which alludes the Poet, where he saies, Audax Iapetigenus. This name or Iaphet in Hebrew signifieth asmuch as Dilatation or enlargement: Whereas the Greeke Etymologists ridiculously draw it from many other origi∣nalls: in the like sort Tacitus ignorant of the Hebrew, would haue the people of Palestine to be called Iudaei quasi Idaei, from the mountaine Ida in Creete, from which he dreames they were deriued; whereas the word in the Chaldy signifies, as much as Praysers. In like manner Ion or (according to Ho∣mer ) Iaon, supposed the first Author of the Iones, would the Graecians deriue from a flower, whereas the word in Hebrew signifie, as much as a deceiuer: Whence Daniel prophecied of Alexander the great, that the King of that is Iaan or Iauan should raigne in Assiria ▪ Instances in this kind are infi∣nite, as of Danaus, drawne from Dan which signifies a Iudge, whence comes Dardanus which is the seat of Iudges: Of Ianus from Iaijn ▪ signifying wine, in which sense hee is by Halicharnisseus called Oenotrius : Of Achaeis which signi∣fies Greece, Aegipt which is streight or narrow Nimrode Re∣bellous. Ninus a sonne, Niniue the house of Ninus, Solon qua∣si Solam a peace-maker. So Cadmus supposed to bee the father of letters and learning, amongst the Graecians, signifies in the originall, so much as an Easterne man or an ancient man. Should wee runne any further on this point, wee should bee thought to write a dictionary, for as much as all the ancient names amongst the Graecians spring from the same foun∣taine▪ Whence that Aegyptian Priest had good reason to ob∣iect to Solon: That the Graecians seemed children, because they had nothing ancient amongst them: But to better pur∣pose a Christian obiected to the Graecians that Moyses the Lawgiuer to the Christians was ancienter then all the Graeci∣an Gods; Other reasons are taken from the Religion of the Hebrewes, out of which seeme to be deriued all the famous religions of the Earth; For to let passe the Christian, Iewish, & Mahometan Religions at this day flourishing, all of them chal∣lenging great antiquity, and taking a great mixture from the truest and ancientest Hebrew discipline: It is manifest that in the Heathenish superstitions themselues, many footsteppes haue bin discouered: which will appeare by diuers Instances. These arguments I confesse seeme very strong, but yet not of sufficient strength to enforce credulity without other war∣rant: To say peremptorily with M r . Bodin, that by the con∣sent of ancient writers, the Chaldeans are acknowledged the most ancient people, is more then I dare to venter: Neither is this opinion so strongly fortified with arguments, but Reason may steppe in to haue a doubtfull assault. Their first argument drawne from the testimony of holy Scriptures in th of Genesis, seemes to stand on our side, altogether against them: For whereas it is said, that they came from the east into the plaine of Shinaar, it is manifest that the east was first peopled; or else how should this people come from the east into these plaines of Shinaar, to erect the tower of Babel ? Secondly, whereas they vrge Arts, Ciuility, Magnificence of the Chal∣deans, wee shall find it rather to agree to the people which dwell farther east, as is witnessed by the former instances. And if any obiect that at this day is found the contrary, for as much as we find the Indian to be a barbarous blind and igno∣rant Nation, in respect of the Asiatickes and Europaeans, we answere two wayes. 1 First, that we find not by experience the East-Indians to bee so altogether deuoide of ciuility, but that wee may obserue not only amongst them the footsteppes, but also the practise of many ingenuous Arts, sage gouern∣ment, policy, and magnificence, as amongst the Chinois and the large territory of the great Mogull 2. It is not hard to imagine, that in so large a tract of time, the best setled com∣mon wealthes should be brought to nought, arts, ciuility, magnificence, be forgotten, and the rarest inuentions bee cast into obliuion, especially by those two enemies of ciuility▪ warres and luxury; both which hauing the raignes in their own hands, are quickly able to abolish all wholesome discipline, both in Lawes and Religion. 3. Their argument drawne from the footesteppes of Languages in my shallow con∣ceit, proues nothing else but that all Lawes, Arts, and Learning was deriued to the Graecians from the Chaldaeans, or the Nations neare adioyning, which formerly receiued it from them. But how farre Learning might propagate it selfe the o∣ther way towards the East, is not a matter so cleare and out of question. The preseruation of the Language (for ought I ee) might grow from the continuance of the Religion, more firmely rooted, and for a long time continued in Abrahams posterity, whose abode was settled there about, whereas the other farre diuorced, aswell from their first spring, as the mo∣numentall seales of their religion, quickly turned Religion into Pagan Idolatry: Many reasons besides the disprouing of this former opinion may bee alleaged to proue the Easterne part of the world to haue bin first peopled: amongst which I will only cull out this one, grounded on the text of holy Scrip∣ture. It is warranted out of the text: 1 That when the waters beg n to decrease vpon the face of the earth, and the Arke be∣gan to rest vpon the mountaine Ara at, Noah sent out a doue to make tryall, who returned with an oliue-branch in her mouth. 2 That neare the place he issued out of the Arke with all his family, he planted a vineyard, and was drunke with the iuyce of the Grape, not knowing the strength thereof: out of which by all probable coniecture must needes bee collected, that the Regions neare the place where the Arke first rested, by the benefit of Nature afforded both Vines and Oliues: for we cannot imagine the silly Doue at the time of the flood empty gorged to haue flowne very farre ouer the face of the waters to obtaine this Oliue branch, nor Noah after the flood to haue gone very farre to seeke out a conuenient place for his Vineyard: whence it is most likely that the Arke rested in such a place, whose neare adjoining Regions are inriched with such commodities. But this cannot bee verified of Armenia, wherein for ought my reading informes me, are found nei∣ther Vines nor Oliues, whereas some places Eastward, where∣on the Arke according to this other opinion was supposed to rest, afford both in great plenty. To vmpite betwixt these two opinions, I leaue to my frendly Readers; because it is not in our power to command, but obey Reason. CHAP. XIV. 1 O F the originall of Inhabitants of the Earth we haue spoken: It re∣maines wee now treat of their naturall Disposition. There is nothing more subiect to admiration, then the di∣uersity of naturall Dispositions in Nations; a matter euident to the eye of obseruation, and needing no proofe or demon∣stration: for who obserues not in all Nations certaine naturall or nationall vertues or vices, which neither time nor Lawes could euer change or correct. For not to farther off then our neighbouring Nations Confines; what Writer in this kind almost, were he not very partiall, hath not taxed pride and ambition in the Spaniard ; leuity, or rather (as Bodin would haue it) temerity in the Fren h ; dangerous dissimula∣tion in the Italian ; Drunkennesse in the Dutch ; Falshood in the Irish ; and gluttony in the English ? And howsoeuer many meanes haue bin put in practise, either by the seuerity of lawes to curb such enormities, or the subtilty of discourse to shroud these vices vnder the name of vertues: yet these markes are found to stick as close as the spots vnto the Leopard, as nei∣ther altering their pristine hue, or yeelding to time or statutes: And if it happened at any time that by extraordinary violence some litle alteration were wrought, yet some few yeares would find it returne againe vnto his owne n ture and dispo∣sition. This variety of dispositions being very many, and d ∣pending on sundry causes, to helpe memory, we will reduce into certaine heads▪ out of which in the generall we may giue a iudgment, leauing the rest to our speciall Tract. The name of naturall disposition in this place we take in the largest sense, so farre forth as it comprehends vnder it the Complexion, Manners, Actions, Languages, Lawes, Religion, and Gouern∣ment. All which so farre forth as they depend from the places we will shew. Neither intend we to handle nicely all these specialities, forasmuch as the Manners, Customes, Lawes, (and for a great part) the externall rites of Religion depend on the naturall constitution of the Inhabitants: so that little can bee spoken of the naturall constitution, but of such actions, effects and markes as shew themselues in their ordinary customes & manners. Wherefore we shall be constrained to treat of them together, the one being a great furtherance to the explanation of the other. 2 The naturall disposition of the Inhabitants of the Earth may suffer change and diuer∣sity, either in respect of the site, or in re∣spect of the quality of the soile, or in re∣gard of the Inhabitants themselues. 3 The site is the respect which one place in position beareth to another: Here a Na∣tion is diuided into, 1 The Northerne or Southerne, 2 The Easterne or Westerne. 4 The Northerne is placed in the North Hemispheare, betwixt the Aequatour and the Artick Pole; The Southerne on the op∣posite side betwixt the Aequatour and the Antarticke Pole. Of the Northerne and Southerne Inhabitants wee speake not here respectiuely, as in regard of the same Hemispheare, but absolutely in regard of the two Hemispheares and their Inhabita s, How these 2 Hemispheares of North and South are varied in respect of the quantity and disposition of the soile is deciphered before. What diuersity shal be found in the people or inhabitants shall be shewed in this Theoreme. 1 The people of the Northerne Hemispheare aswell in riches and magnificence, as vallour, science, and ciuill gouernment, farre surpasse the people of the South Hemispheare. The people of the Northerne Hemispheare wee vnderstand to bee the Europeans, the Asiatickes, the hithermost African being the greater part the Inhabitants of America Mexicana, with the hithermost part of America Peruana together with the people inhabiting the vnknowne land▪ lying vnder the Artick pole, with all the Ilands belonging to each of these▪ The people of the Southerne Hemi-spheare contai e a moity Southward of the Africans, the Inhabitants of America Perua∣na for the most part: the people of the T rra Australis incog∣nita or the soutth Indies, with some Iland belonging there∣vnto. Betwix the e two partitions, If we make a comparison we shall find a greater disparity then euer any inuention of man could any wayes reduce to any shadow of Aequality, or any Trauailers obseruation ould euer steppe in to diminish. To begin with the ri hes▪ It is certaine, that the ase of it in any tion proceeds, either f om the benefit of the soile or from the ill and diligence of the inhabitants▪ The benefit of the soile either in respect of the quantity of the ground, or the quality of the soile in this southerne part, we haue at large proued to be fa e nferio to that of the Northe e H mis∣pheare. The dilig ce of the p ople we can measure no other∣wise then y their Traffick with forraigne nations, or their good husbandry of their owne commodities Their traffick with forraine nations, is suspe ted to be little or nothing at ll, in respect of the theme Inhabitants ha ing small com∣merce or knowledge of for eigne ations, and hat rather en∣forced by violence and onques s▪ them any way des d of them▪ Whereas scarce can be found any nation of the Eart , which cannot by commerce or traffick with forraigne Coun∣tries, at least neighbouring confines both strengthen thēselues, and draw riches from other nations: Lesse can be hoped from their homebred industrie, which is content with sufficiency, neuer aiming at farther riches then naturall neces ty seemes to exact, as may appeare by all records and Histories almost which haue treated of this matter. If we consider the state & magnificene of either, wee shall acknowledge a great diffe∣rence, as disdaining all comparison. The first offpring of all nations owes it selfe (as we haue proued) to our Northerne hemispheare, which that Almighty Creatour of al things bles∣sed with knowledge and ciuill gouernment, before euer this Southerne coast was knowne or mentioned. All the acts of the old and new Testament performed on this side of the Ae∣quatour, can speake the state and magnificence of these nati∣ons, leauing the other as yet neglected without memory or History. Neither hath the Christian religion, the true ground of all settled gouernment euer bin so propitious, as to smile on these iserable Nations, as yet groaning vnder the seruile bonds of g o e. gnorance and Pagan superstition. Where shall we find in any records or antiquities, any state amongst them to parallell the foure greater Monarchies of the Ae sy∣rians, Medes, and Persians, Graecians, and Romans, or the later risen out of their ashes, whereof this one age can pro∣duce no few examples▪ What place is extant at this day in Europe, Asia, the Northern tract of Africk or America (some few Deserts onely excepted) which haue not been either by knowledge receiued from forraigne Nations, or some other meanes in some sort reduced to ciuility▪ At least to haue em∣brased some setled forme of gouernment▪ Whereas the Regi∣ons dayly discouered in the Southerne moity are found most barbarous, without lawes, sciences, or ciuility▪ Or if any such perfection shew it selfe amongst them, it is manifest that it is owed altogether, to the industrie of the Europeans, who with great cost and trauaile, aue brought them such riches w eof the poore wretches neuer knew the want. Insteed of o many Colonies sent out of Europe & Asia into these South∣erne Regions, no record I suppose can mention one euer sent from them vnto vs. Which is an argument of their ignorance and want of traffick. What shall I speake of the vallour and prowesse of the Northerne inhabitants, hauing by the sword erected so many kingdomes, and (as it were) without resis∣tance brought into captiuity those Nations of the South? of Arts and Sciences what can be said, but that the Northerne Inhabitant hath all, and the other in a manner none: For libe∣rall and ingenious sciences and Schooles and Vniuersities dis∣persed in most part of Europe and else-where can speake our glory: Which for ought I could euer learne the Southerne Continent, neuer saw; and admit they know ome thing in some Mechanicall arts, it is no more then necessity requires. Neither in the number and extent of inuention, or curiousnesse of workmanship answearable to that wee find at home. The artes of Printing & Artilery were I suppose neuer of their ac∣quaintance, except perhaps the later, which I dare sweare hath had better acquaintance then welcome; as that which neuer shewed it selfe but to their ruine: No obiection can here take place in this comparison, except some man suppose the mo∣numents and Trophies of the e nations, either being very an∣cient haue miscarried by time, or else being of a newer birth are hid, wanting the light of discouery: But this is a meere coniecture wanting ground: For what Antiquity or record could euer shew so much, as the footesteps or markes of any such mon ments? as for the countries as yet vndiscouered, no better coniecturall iudgement can be giuen, then by that which is already found: For where all other reason and obser∣nation is silent, I alwaies hold equality the best measure: A∣nother argument not inferiour to the rest, is the antiquity of the Northerne nations, which without all question is farre greater then that of the Southerne: Because we cannot ma∣gine any an so aduenturous to passe into these remote quar∣ters, till such times as the places neerer adioyning, growing too populous, cons rained them to seeke out a new ha ita∣ ion; which no man could conceiu to be but in many yeares after the vniuersall Deluge. 5 Each Hemispheare with the Inhabitants therein contained, may againe be diuided according to the longitude or latitude: ac∣cording to the Latitude, Inhabitants may be called either the extreame or Middle. 6 The extreame inhabitants are either the Northerne or Southerne. The former in the higher Hemispheare. The other are the in∣habitants thereunto opposite in the other Hemispheare. 7 The middle Inhabitants are such as are si∣tuate in the middle betwixt the Aequator and the Pole in either Hemispheare. The mistaking of the true limits of North and South in this our Northerne Hemispheare, hath caused great errour a∣mongst the Ancients: Insomuch as Hippocrates pronounced the people of the North to be of a leane & dry disposition, of a small and dwarfish statu e; whereas either writers out of a good obseruation haue found them to be of a tall stature, big-boned, & of a most able constitution in respect of those of the South. To compose which difference we must haue recourse to that sub-partition of the Hemispheare before mentioned, wherein we allotted of the 90 degrees accompted from the Aequatour to the Pole, 30 for heat, 30 for cold, & 30 for tem∣perament ; Whereof the former lyeth Southward to the Aequa∣tour▪ The second is accompted from the pole: the other is con∣ceiued to lye betwixt both. But because wee find this Mathe∣maticall diuision to be too precise, to answere the obseruation of Writers in this kinde, we must a little alter these bounds, that these rules may rather stoop to Nature and ob eruation. then Nature bee sq ared to our owne conceits; yet shall wee shew in a generality, and for the most part, that the naturall disposition of the Inhabitants, ought to be iudged and measu∣red according to these limits: though not exactly answering in precise degrees. Wherefore towards the North wee limit these (with Bodin & other good writers) which lie from the 50 th degree Northward to the 70 th ; in which Tract we shall find our Brittaines, Ireland, Denmarke, Gotland, the lower Ger∣many from Moenus and Hipanus to Scythia and Tartary, which ake vp a great part of Europe & Asia: on the South we place the mos Southerly Spaniards, he Sicilians, Peloponnesians, Cretians, Syrians, Arabians, Persians, Sufians, Gedrosians, Indi∣ans, Egyptians, Cyranians, Carthaginians, Numidians, Lybi∣ans, Moores, and the Inhabitants of Florida in America. The middle Region is meant that which lyes iust in the middle place betwixt the Tropicke and the Pole; not that which lyes betwixt the Pole and the Line: the reason whereof wee haue shewed before; because the places vnder the Tropicks are found to bee hottest, but vnder the Line more temperate; so that our temperate Clime here we place that which beginnes at the 40▪ and endeth at the 50 degree of latitude: In which Climat be the Northernmost Spaine, France, Italy, the higher Germany (as farre as the Mase ) both H ngaries, Illyria, both Mys as, Da ia, Moldauia, Macedon, Thrace, and the better part of Asia the lesser, Armenia, Parthia, Sogdiana, and a great part of the greater Asia: so that all the Nations as yet mentio∣ned in histories▪ and perfectly discouered in our Northerne Hemispheare are contained betwixt the 30 degrees of lati∣tude and the 60. What to thinke of the Nations dwelling be∣twixt the two Tropicks, and those which are 60 degrees to the Pole, for want of accurate obseruation and History we can set downe no certainty▪ ye so farre as men may iudge by con∣iecture, we may a compt in the Region betwixt the Tropicks, the 15 degrees from the Tropicke towards the Line, to be of like quality with the 15 degrees without the Tropicke. The Tract in the middle vnder the Equatour, being more tempe∣rate, the that of the Tropicks, may be iudged to come neere the temp r of the middle Region betwixt the Tropicke and the Line, though perhaps somewhat hotter. For the Regions very neere the Poles, lesse c rtainty can be collected: yet that litle which we find concerning the nature of these Inhabitants we will ot omit. According to this partition of our Northern Hemispheare▪ we may ma iudgment of he othe ; because where no other cause shewes it selfe, we may wel guesse these places which are of equall site to be of equall disposition, so far forth as they respect the heauenly operation. All which con∣cerne the n turall disposition of the Inhabitants▪ wee will re∣duce to these hree heads▪ to wit either 1 the bodily qualities; 2 the mentall Affections, 3 the outward Actions. 1 The Extreame Inhabitants towards either Pole, are in complexion Hot and Moist: Those toward the Equatour Cold and Dry : those of the middle indifferent as partaking of both. The confirmation of this proposition depends on 2 points▪ the first is the Declaration of the Cause of this diuersity: the second is the ffects and diuerse tokens which this variety of empe p oduces, a well in the Accidents of the Body▪ as the Mind. The cause we haue partly befo e opened▪ which is t e Heat of the Sunne in limates neerer the Equatour, and the Cold i places farthe remote, and situate neerer the Pole: whereof the former, working on the Internall heat and moi∣sture of men and all other li ng creatures liuing in those hot Climats, d awes it o t, and consumes it in such ort▪ that little remaines but Cold and Dry Melancholy, as the Seas in the bot∣tome, the other parts being (as it were) euaporated: For by how much more heat any man receiues outwardly from the heat of the Sunne▪ so much more wants he the ame inwardly; which euery man may see confirmed out of ordinary experi∣ence▪ since that our naturall heat is far more vigorous in Win∣ er then in Summer, and that our ioints are more opera ue in frosty weather, and then when the Northwinde is sti ing. On the other side in the Summer wee commonly obserue the con∣trary: we find our ioints lazy and heauy, our Appetites dull, as may also bee perceiued in the English, Germans, and French ▪ tra ailing from the Nor h Southerly into I aly and Spaine, who if they confine not their dyet to a sparing rate, they com∣monly are surprized by surfets: an example we haue of Philip Duke of Austria, liuing in Spaine after his German fashion. But on the contrary if a Spaniard, who in his owne Country is inured to great Niggardlinesse, arriue in our Northerne Coun∣trey, he commonly proues a better rencher-man then our na∣tiue Inhabitants. And this Bodin obserues to fall out true, not onely in Men, but also in beasts, which driuen towards the North waxe fat, and proue well; but towards the South they pine away and waxe eane▪ which may well be confirmed out of Leo Afer, who auerres, that almost throughout all Africke you shall find f w or no heards of cattle or horse; few sheepe, and scarce any milke: whereas each mans Table almost in Germany and Brita ny can giue a plaine demonstration of our Countreyes store in this kind▪ Hence may appeare that as the heat of the Sunne towards the Equatour, by drawing out the internall heat and moisture causeth men inwardly to bee left cold and ry; so towards the Pole the internall moisture be∣ing pr se ed from the Excesse of Externall heate, and the in∣ternall heat being strengthned and thickned by externall cold, haue left vnto them a complexion of heat and moisture. The middle Region betwixt both extreames being compounded of both, must needes by mix ure and participation inioy a middle quality. Besides this e po i ion of the causes of this temper wee shall obserue many speciall markes and Instances which will discouer this variety of disposition. First, it is plaine that heat and moisture are the two qualities of fecundi∣ty. Whence it must consequently follow, those Regions which are most populous to bee chiefly endowed with this quality and disposition. Now where shall wee of this Hemi∣spheare find any Countrey to whom Nature owes a greater inc ease of mankinde, but in the North amongst the Go hes, the S y hians, the Scandians ▪ and Germans, by whose abun∣dant fertility▪ vast desarts haue beene cultured and inhabited, stately Cities haue bin founded, Colonies haue bin transported and deriued almost into all Europe ? Hence haue Methodius, & P. Diaco compared the armies of the North to swarme of Bee ; and the North is termed by Olaus Magnus, the store-house of mankind: to wit, from which so many strong Nati∣ons, a the Gothes, the Gepidae, the Hunnes, the Cymbrians ▪ the Lumbards, he Alan ▪ the B rgundians, the Normans, the Picts, the Her , the S e ian , the Slaui, the Swi zers and the Rus∣sians are not ashamed to deriue their Ancestry. But here may bee obiected that the Southerne people are much more addi∣cted to Veneri then the Northerne, which seemes an argument of greater Heat : But to this I answer, that this insatiate ap∣pe ite of Venery in the Souther e people, proceeds not from heat, b t from Choler Adust, and Melancholy: which humours carry in them a Salt and sharpe quality (according to Physici∣ans) which stirres vp their appetite to Venery: which we may plainely obseru by experience: for no men are more moued by this itching appetite of carnall Copulation, then Melan∣ch ly men. But howsoeuer this affection is most predominant in such men, yet it is hardly seconded by p rformance; which makes Geographers to ascribe more promptnesse of generati∣on to the No therne men, although sensuall co piscence raigne more in the Southerne men; which indifferent propor∣tion was without doubt granted to either, by the prouidence of Almighty God, that they who were endowed with a grea∣ter sufficiency, should lesse affect sensuall delights then the rest, which want that proportion of hea and moisture. And those of the other sort should haue their Appetites more rai∣sed vp to wantonnesse, without the which their off-spring would soone fayle. A second argument to proue our assertion is the Tall and large statur of the Norther e man, which ar∣gues both heat and moisture; whereas the Southerne man is small and dwarfish in stature, composed of weake▪ and feeble Nerues. That the people situate towards the Pole in a mode∣rate distance, su passe in greatnesse, can be showne not only in this our Hemisph are in the Germa s, Scythians, Belgians, nd others▪ but also in the other by the Pantagones, whose si uation Southward answeres somewhat neerely to the hight of Germany. That moisture is a great cause of growth, appeares as well by Trees and other vegetalls, which growing in low and marish grounds increase to a most incredible greatnesse; as of those orementioned on the side of Riuo Negro in Peru ▪ and neere the Lake Hiarotis in India as by Beasts▪ For first we find the moistest to bee of greatest stature, which is the rea∣son why the great Whales and fishes in the sea grow to such a vast quantity. Secondly, such Beasts as haue hot and moist bo∣dies cannot so well prosper and liue in those Southerne coun∣ reyes; as the horse which by nature being hot and moist, li∣ueth but fa ntly in Aethiopia, yet is of good strength in Scythia ; Whereas the Asse being by nature hot and dry is of great ac∣compt and seruice in Africke, in Europe little respected, in Scythia cannot liue. Neither is moisture sufficient for the growth except it bee stirred vp by heat: wherefore we may conclude hence that the Northerne man hath both: Out of the contrary effects, wee may likewise collect, that the Southerne man wants this quality▪ These reasons indifferently proue these qualities to wit, of heat and moisture, to bee in the Northerne man, and the contrary in the Southerne. Di∣uerse other arguments are vrged, some to proue the one qua∣lity, some the other apart. A great argument of heat in the Northerne man may bee his extraordinary drinking: A vic which could neuer bee reformed or corrected by times or sta∣tutes. This drowth of theirs stirring vp this desire of drinking, can proceed from no other cause then their heat: Whereas the Southerne man is seldome taxed of this vice: not because hee is more religiously temperat then the Northerne; but ra∣ther for the naturall temper of his body, which can neither require or beare so much as the Northerne. In so much as Bodin seemes to make a doubt, whether the immoderat drin∣king of the Germans is to bee esteemed a greater f ult, then the niggardly sparing humour of the Italian : sith both arise rather out of nature then education: Another argument of heat in the Northerne man, is the extraordinary strength in respect of the Southerne man, which is an apparant demon∣stration of heat▪ Wee find that the bloud of the Scythian is full of small strings such as are in the gore of Bulls and Bores, and betokeneth strength: Whereas the bloud of the African is thinne, such as is in a Hart or Hare. No lesse are those reasons which especially proue the Northerne man to bee endowed with much moisture. Thirdly wee may much better argue from the Physiognomicall accident of the body: wee shall find the inhabitants vnder the Tropickes to bee exceeding blacke: vnder the Pole it selfe beyond 60 degrees somewhat browne, but from thence about 60 their colour is reddish: from thence to 45 degrees whitish: about the 30 they beginne to wax yel∣low▪ and then some what enclining to greene: all which pro∣ceeds out of the variety of heat and cold: For the Blacknesse of the Africans about the Tropickes, wee can ascribe to no o∣ther c rtaine ause, then externall heat, and internall cold, his necessary concomitant: neere to which approacheth the yel∣low and greene colour of the people not farre of; Whereof the form r discouers Choller and Adustion: the other me an∣ holy ▪ And how soeuer the brownnesse of the people dwelling very neere th Pole may come by reason of externall cold, which by excesse, rather dries vp their moisture, then streng∣thens the internall heat: Yet the Red colour of the Inhabitants about 60 degrees is a firme argument of heat: and the white ue of the middle people, an apparant marke of a middle tem∣pe . No lesse may bee collected from the eyes and haires of these three Nations. The eyes of the Scythians are generally tending to a gray colour; The remote haue them of a blew-whitish shining colour; as the Cymbrians and Danes accor∣ding to Plutarch ▪ The Britannes, ermans, and Normans come neere vnto this colour, but haue them not al ogether so gray and shining but more obscure. But the Southerne man hath he colour of his eyes much enclining to blacke. Now if wee will belee ristotle in his Problemes, the gray colour of the eyes is a very great argument of heat; But the blackish colour r∣gues the want of heat; Those which dwell in the middle Re∣gions, haue for the most part their eyes of a darke-blew▪ which colour is app r nt in the eyes of Goates, which as Pliny writes are neuer pur-blind or dimme of sight. Many speciall argu∣ments besides those before mentioned, are produced to shew he Northerne man to surpasse in moisture, as the other in drouth: The first may be taken from their voice, which in the Scy hian, or Northerne man is tending to hoarsenes; but in the Africans very sharp and shrill, as in the Ethiopians, & Cartha∣ginians, and the most southerly Spaniards. That this difference doth arise from the moisture of the one, and the want of it in the other may as easily be perswaded; because we obserue women which are moister then men, to haue sharp & shriller voices: Also that too much moisture in wood or mettall makes the sound of it very hoarse and harsh; as wee see in lead, whereas other mettalls giue a shriller sound: Another reason is drawne from their extraordinary sweating; for it is obserued, that Nor∣therne men trauailing towards the So th, or warring in hotter Countreyes, are like to faint and perish through extraordinary sweating, as Plutarch in the life of Marius, records of the moist bodies of the Cimbrians. Thirdly, it might seeme woun∣derfull which Tacitus relates of the German nation, that they loue sloth and yet ate rest; because (as in Children) the natu∣rall heat prouokes them to Action, but the moisture procures Softnesse: whence they must either fight or sleepe▪ Hence the Italians and Spaniards make accompt, if they can suffer or withstand the f rst or secon assa lt of the French or Germans ▪ easily to vanquish them; because as Mari and Caesar obser∣ued of the French, tha in the first as ault they shewed them∣selues more then Men, in the second lesse then Women. A fourth reason not inferiour to the rest may be drawne from the so t bodies, of the Germ ns and Scyt i ns, not any way patient of labour, hunger, and thir t▪ although very s rong and able to giue a suddaine encounter or venture on a warlike exploite: The contrary in all shall we find in the Southerne man; out of which we may we l collect, that he enioies a contrary tempe : Besides all which we haue said concerning this assertion more shall appeare hereafter by these subsequent Theoremes. 2 The extreame Inhabitants towards the Poles are more naturally inclined to Mechanicall workes and Martiall endeauours: the Ex∣treame towards the Equatour to workes of Religion and Contemplation : the middle to lawes and ciuility. There are found three kinds of discipline, which vsually in∣uade and occupy the mind and faculties of man: The first are Mechanicall and externall operations, the which are proiected in the Intellectuall part, yet receiue thei perfection from the hands and externall organs; Such as are Artillery, making of Ordinance ; casting of mettalls, and Chymicall inuention ; Prin∣ting and the like Arts. The second is Contemplation, separate & remoued from externall operation. The third as the meane betwixt both, is Ciuill and Morall discipline, whose act and perfection consists, in the making of Lawes, establishing and gouerning of States, prescribing and maintaining of Diuine worship, with other matters of the like nature. These gifts it plea ed God so to distribute to mankinde, that the former should bee most appropriate to the Northerne man; the se∣cond to the Southerne, the third to the inhabitants of the mid∣dle region: in such wise as the one should need, and not enuy the others perfection. All which we sh ll demonstrate first out of the causes and ground; Secondly▪ out of the effects. The causes wee haue shewed in the former Theoreme, wherein wee haue ascribed to the Northerne man abundance of heat and moisture in respect of the other; which are the chiefest aides of the imagination, on which mechanicall faculties de∣pend; also their plenty of bloud and humours distempering their minds: they are, by this meanes lesse giuen to contempla∣tion. The Southerne men hauing cold and dry braines▪ are of greatest vnderstanding in Contemplati e matters, being (as it were) by reason of melancholy abstract from externall operati∣on. The middle temper of the braine and humours must needs be the mother o a middle discipline, which is found to be that which concernes Manners, Lawes, and Religion. Here some haue gone about to reduce these three kinds of people to three planets answerable to these 3 dispositions. Ouer he Southerne people they set Saturne : the Northerne they commit to the gouernment of Mars ; the middle inhabitants to Iupiter. The power of Saturne according to the Chaldeans consists in Con∣templation ; of Iupiter in practicall action ; of Mars in Artifici∣all operation. Which 3 properties may be well gathered out of the Hebrew tongue, natures best interpreter; for Saturne they call which is as much to say as quiet; because nothing better b fits the nature of contemplation then retired quiet∣nesse: Iupiter they call which is as much to say as Iust: Which the Grecians hauing receiued from these Hebrewes, they fained Iupiter to bee the God of Iustice. Mars they cal∣led which signifieth strong or puis ant, for which cause the Chaldeans and the Greclans ▪ would haue Mars the God of warre. To Saturne they ascribe cold, to Mars heat, to Iupiter a temperature betwixt both. To the first, they impute the inuention of sciences and such as concernes Con∣templation; To the second practicall prudence; To the third Arts and Workemanship. Whereof the first depends from the Vnderstanding, the second from practicall discourse, the last from the opera ion of the phantasie. But to come neerer the matter and descend to particulars: wee will first beginne with the Northerne man whom we shall find to be the father of most mechanicall Inuentions as of Gunnes, Printing, the art of Liquefaction, Chimistrie with infinite other excellent Arts. Hence it comes to passe that the Italians and Spaniards, are vsed to send ouer for Britaines and Germans, as for those which are endowed with a heauenly gift in the Inuention of vei es of Mettalls vnder the Earth, as also for the opening and well ordering of su h Mines: Let any man cast his eyes on England, the Neither-lands, Germany, he shall find the In a∣bi ants generally, either as the Schollers and darlings of Mars weilding their swords, or as Pioners leuelling of mountaines, or as Ingmers contriuing the course of waters, or hunting in the woods, or plowing in the field, or looking to their flockes on the mo ntaines, or working in their shops, or at least set vp∣on some externall worke or other: that their wits▪ (as Bodin merily speakes) might seeme to bee in their handes. From whence come for the most part ou seuerall sortes of stuffes▪ our choice workes in wood, mettall, Iuo y, our variety of in∣struments, from the Italian or Spaniard? No truly: they can rather admire then imitate; and better set vs the mater alls then inuent the workem nship, like those distressed Israelites which were enforced to runne vnto the Philistines to haue their swords sharpened. As we ascribe to those nations of the North this perfection in operatiue and externall faculties; So cannot wee deny the Southerne man his due prerogatiue▪ which is Religion & Contemplation. For these nations being aboue all other affected with melancholy, willingly withdr w themselues from common society into Desarts, and remote re∣ceptacles, more accommodated to abstracted meditation: For contemplation (being of the Hebrewes tearmed a precious death) hath a speciall force to sharpen the wits of men, and by separation, (as it were) from the dregges of the vulgar, not onely opens vnto him the se rets of nature, but giue him wings to lie vp to heauen in sacred meditation. Whence it cannot seeme strange that from these parts at first proceeded the Prophets, Philosophers, Mathematicians of great estimati∣on▪ Al o that almost all Religions of any great moment, owe their first originall to those parts: we need roue no farther then the Hebrewes, Chaldaeans, Aegyptians, Graecians, whom wee shall find the first founders of Diuine and Humane sciences. Which historicall obseruation dissents not any whit from the iudgement of the Naturalists: Because (as Huar s obserues) the true oment of the best vnderstanding, consis s in the cold and drye braine incident to melancholy. And Aristo le ob∣serues, that beas s thēselues are so much the more adiudged to approach the prudencie of man, by how much they par ake the quality of cold. An instance of which may bee giuen in the Elephant, whose bloud (according to Plinys Testimony) is coldest of all other Creatures. To this I might adde for an ar∣gument. of the r ligious disposition of the Southerne man, Af r writes oncerning the vast number of Tem∣ples in ome places of Africke, as about Fesse & Morocco, their strict obs ruation of holy rites, their igide Ecclesiasticall cen∣sure, wit such like. What is spoken by Aluarez of the hill A iar in the midst of Africke, of their strange Library. Churches, Pallaces, with other matters of this purpose, would serue well to my purpose, had the ingenuity to be∣le ue the I s te. But against this may be obiected perchance that the Chris ian Religion which is the truest and only Reli∣gion hath no great footing as yet amongst tho e Southerne Na∣tions. Secondly, that their Churches haue no perfect platforme of Ecclesiasticall▪ gouernment, as we find in other Churches to∣wards the North rne tract. To the first I answer; that we here speake of the Inclination of men to Religious exercises, so far forth as it depends on their naturall disposition; not respecting this or that Religion: for to bee informed in the true Religion and reiect all other, depends not any way on the naturall In∣clination of men, but on the immediate gift of the Almighty God, which is pleased oftentimes to make elec on of one Nation before the other, to make the one (according to the Apostle ) a vessell of honour, the other of dishonour. To the second I likewise answer, that in Religion two things are to be con∣ idered: First the Religious and deuou Inclination of man to embrace diuine contemplation: Secondly, the well ordering and gouer ing of Religious a ions, according to Lawes and Statutes perta ning to the extern ll regi ent of the Church The fo mer onely being gran ed to he Southerne man, wee may ascribe the perfection of the other to the people of the middle Region, whom we haue pronounced to bee most hap∣py in the managing of iuill af aires and Politicke gouern∣ment▪ Now to proue this people to bee b st endow d with this faculty, many reasons may bee alleaged; because accor∣ding to the test mony of most approued writers, wee haue found Lawes, Manners▪ Statutes, & the best manner of gouern∣ing Common-wealths to haue proce ded from these Nations. For Histories will shew vs, that the greatest and b st empires of the world haue flourished in Asia, Greece, Asy ia, Italy, France, Germany, which lie betwixt the Equ tour & the P le, from the 40 to the 50 degrees: And that out of these haue al∣way proceeded the best commanders, the most prudent States-Men and Law-giuers, the wisest Lawyers, the most eloquent Oratours, the wariest Merchants. Whereas neither Africa in the South nor Scythia in the North ▪ could euer boast of many Law-giuers or States-Men worthy note; whence Galen com∣plaines that Scythia neuer brought forth any Philosopher be∣sides Anacharsis of any great credit. 3 The People of the Extreame Region tow∣ards the Poles in Martiall prowesse haue commonly proued stronger then those neere the Equatour: but the middle people more proui∣dent then either in the establishment and pre∣seruation of Commonwealths. The grounds of this Proposition wee haue layd before: for the former clause, that the people of the North should proue more puissant then these of the South, may well bee conclu∣ded out of their naturall strength of body, and their courage of the minde: whereof the latter makes them eady to at∣tempt, the other to execute most chiualrous designes. Nei∣ther want there most true and pregnant examples in history to second this principle: for euery man that is indifferently seene in history may obserue with wonder how the strong Nations of the Scythians haue inuaded the South, win∣ning from them many Trophies and victories: whereas wee seldome find any expedition set on from the South to the North (except to the losse or ruine of the South▪) worth any memorable relation. To this many would haue these threatning prophecies of Ieremy, Ezechiel, and Esay to al∣lude, which foretold, that from the North should issue warres, troopes of horsemen, and the Ruines of Kingdomes: This we shall obserue to bee true not only in the generall, but al∣most in all particular States, which wee shall find propagated from the North to the South. The Assyrians at first ouercame the Chald s ; the Medes the Assyrians ; the Persians the Medes, the Greekes the Persians, the Parthians the Greeks, the Romans the Cart aginians, the Gothes the Romans, the Turkes the Arabians, the Tartars the Turkes: and howsoeuer the Romans by their prowesse wanne somewhat towards the North, yet found they by experience that beyond Danubius no great matter was to be expected; for as much as these Nati∣ons could not be easily vanquished, and being ouercome would not away with subiection: which (as some say) was the cause that Traian hauing built a great Bridge of stone ouer the Da∣now, was perswaded to breake it downe. Tacitus expressely confesseth, that the Germans were too hard for the Romans, and could not haue beene ouercome by them, but by the ad∣uantage of the weapons and manner of fight; wherein the Romans hauing long continued a ciuill Nation, had practised themselues▪ which he secondeth by many instances, drawne from seuerall confl cts betwixt the Germans and the Romans, which he might well speake; for as much as himselfe reports 210 yeeres were spent in the conquest of Germany, and no Nation so much troubled them as this; which notwithstanding when all was past, was thought to bee triumphed ouer rather then conquered. It were an infinite taske to write all which Tacitus relates of the valour and warlike disposition of the Germans, being a Nation louing rest, and hating Idlenes, puni∣ hing cowardice with Death, and reputing it an inexplable shame for a subiect to see his Prince slaine in Battail , and re∣turne aliue without him. As much or more hee reports from Iulius Agricola, then Proconsul of Britany, of our ancient Bri∣tish Nation whose factions and dissentions amongst themselues gaue occasion to the Roman victory, and not the Roman valour wherein hee confessed them no way to stand inferiour. To strengthen this assertion, History will afford an euidence almost in euery corner of the world, wherein wee shall find the North by sundry conquests to haue preuailed against the South ▪ In the East parts wee find that Ci gis Can a Nor∣therne Tartar conquered the Indians: That the Tartarians al∣so conquered the Armenians ; and yet the Armenians had such aduant ge against the Southerne people, that the Mamalukes esteemed a strong Nation in Aegypt, were first chosen out of Armenia. Also▪ wee find that the people of Ca ha subdued the Chinois and the Indians. Wee read also that Mahomet a Saracen Sultan of Persia, hired certaine Northerne Scythians, with whose strength hee ouerthrew the Caliph of Babylon, who dwelt afterwards in Turcomania. Neither wants Ame∣rica many examples in this kind, and no question but many o∣thers haue been drowned in obliuion for want of History. We find that the people of the North in this Continent preuailed against the South, and conquered Mexico, which was after∣ward subdued againe by Cortese ; and by later discouery of our English nation we are giuen to vnderstand that the people about Terra de Laboradore are a fierce warlike people, in so much as rather then they would yeeld themselues to be taken captiue by our men, they haue been seene to make away them∣selues. To goe no further then our own countrey, who knowes not how many famous ouerthrowes haue in later Ages▪ beene giuen to the Spaniards and the French ; especially to the later, who haue feared the vtter vndoing of their State: yet neither of these two great Kingdomes could euer attempt any thing against the English ▪ worthy Chronicle or obseruation: If any man obiect the actions of King William the Conquerour, wee can answer many wayes: first that hee wanne the soueraignty not meerely by the sword, but by Agreement and compositi∣on, challenging a promise from King Edward the predecessour, and being fortified with a strong faction of the nobility of the Realme: and moreouer the malice of the Subiects against Harald being an vsurping Tyrant, gaue great spurres to his victory: wherefore wee cannot iudge this a true Conquest: yet hath England beene conquered of the Danes a more Nor∣therne people, and suffered many inconueniences of the Scots, but yet were neuer able to conquer them vtterly, or bring them vnder subiection; although fewer in number, and neer their Confines. Now for the second clause▪ that the peo∣ple of the Middle Region are more prouident in preseruation of Common-wealths is warranted out of the same grounds: for to this two things are necessary, to wit, Armes and Coun∣sell: whence they vsed to paint Pallas armed, to signifie that not only strength, but Counsell was necessary for the establish∣men of Kingdomes. The Southerne people (as we haue shew∣ed) being altogether addicted to contemplation, haue beene vnable either to defend themselues, or repell an enemy. On the other side the people of the North hauing strength suffici∣ent to assault, for want of prudence and counsell could neuer long enioy their Conquests, so that wee shall seldome read of any great Empire established of either. But the middle people ha∣uing strength to subdue the Southerne, and policy enough to ouercome the strength of the North, haue established many great and famous Empires. Here for an ample example wee may produce the State of the Roman Empire, which borrow∣ed Lawes and discipline from the Graecians, nauticall Scien es from the Sicilians and Punicks, military discipline from their dayly exercise: and therefore was it no great wonder, that in state and glory they surmounted all other Nations. On the o∣ther side wee finde many famous victories atchieued by the Northerne people, yet could they neuer leaue behind them any large Empire, but as easily lost as wonne their Kingdomes. Thus fared it with the Gothes, the Hunnes, the Heruli, and the Vandals, which with so many strong Armies inuaded Europe, and Asia, who neuerthelesse for want of Wisdome and fore∣sight, could not hold what they got, or settle therein any state of long continuance. 4 The extreame Regions in manners, acti∣ons, and customes, are cleane opposite, the one to the other. The middle partake of mix∣ture of both. That the manners of men depend on the naturall complexi∣on and temper, is warranted as well by experience as appro∣ued testimony of our best Philosophers. For howsoeuer gr ce o education may make a change; yet this is extraordina∣ry, and these raines once loosed men easily returne to their former disposition: How much the Northerne man differs from the Southerne in naturall constitution, wee haue former∣ly aught; out of which wee cannot but conclude, a great dis∣parity in manners and customes ▪ Yet o shew a mo e speciall and euident demonstration, wee will make a particular enu∣meration of such affections as are incident to the Nort ern & Sothern man, & out of the comparison make ou iudgement▪ First therefore, it is manifest out of ancient and moderne obseruation, that the Northerne man hath beene axed of too much leuity and inconstancy: The Southerne man contrari∣wise of too much peruerse stubbornesse, as well in opinion as affection. The reason of both wee haue before specified, to bee their naturall complexion: which in the former is inclined to sanguine, in the later to Choller Adust, and melancholy : where∣of the one is the more subiect to change or impression, then the other. Galen deriuing all vertues from the humours of the body, makes Choll r the mother of prudence, melanch ly of constancy, bloud of mirth, fleame of mansuetude : Out of the mixture of which humours, infinite variety ariseth. And be∣cause these humours are seldome equally, or proportionally combined, and tempered together; they become the sources of infinite vices: Which Inequality of temperament is rather found in the extreame regions: And therefore no maruaile if they are obserued, to haue beene subiect to greater vices then those of the middle region: For the mutability and leui∣ty of the Northerne Nations, wee can haue no greater argu∣ment then the change of religion: It is written of the Ostro∣gothes and Visigothes, that being expulsed by King Attila, they besought Valens that hee would grant them a dwelling place: conditionally promising, that they would submit them∣selues, as well to the lawes of the Empire, as to the Christian Religion. Which hauing obtained, they fled from their promise and perfidiously burnt the Emperor aliue. The Gothes, as soone as they came into Italy, embraced the Christian Religion, but soone ranne into Arianisme: The people of Gr enland accor∣ding to M sters relation, being of a wauering disposition, soone lik't the Christian Religion, but soone relapsed to Idola∣trie. The Turkes being a kind of Scythians, assoone as they came into Asia, without any great cons raint, embraced Ma∣h metanisme. The Tartars likewise, without any enforce∣ment yeelded first to Christianity, and soone fell backe to the Arabian rites. The Normans comming into France although very rude and barbarous, reiecting Gentilisme, Paganisme, subscribed to the Christians. As soone or sooner the Islan∣der fell from Idolatrie to the true Religion. The Bohemians and Saxons first cast off the Roman yoake; which were secon∣ded by all Saxoni , the Cities of the Balticke sea, Denmarke, Norway, Suedia, Heluetia, and Britanny. The reuolt of these Nations from the Roman subiection, I cannot tearme leuity or inconstancy in their chiefe leaders and teachers: Being such as vpon long deliberation and mature aduice attempted that, which they knew to bee most consonant to truth and reason: to whom without doubt God Almighties hand was not wan∣ting. But for the rude and vulgar people to be so soone wonne, and turned from one opinion to aonther, without longer deli∣beration, was argument of a mutable disposition: Sith there can bee no greater token of Inconstancy then to make an ab∣solu e change of Religion in all points in so short a space; whereas the Religions being so neerely affined, the one to the other, no man at first sight, out of reason and discourse would embrace or reiect all grounds together, but by degrees: No lesse argument of leuity in those Northerne people, is the di∣straction and diuision of them into so many sorts and factions of Religion, as wee find now in Germany, Belgia, Polonia, and else-where, which no doubt at first proceeded from one or few beginnings. But on the contrary side, if wee looke on the Africans and Southerne people, we shall find them as ob∣stinate and peruerse in standing to their owne propositions, as ready to tax the Northerne people of leuity and Inconstancy. For such hath been the setled constancy of these nations, as wel Africans as Asiaticks ; that no meanes could be inuented to draw them from their opinion, but either heauenly miracles or force of armes. Which constancy hath beene apparant, no onely in men but also in women and children: which made Antiochus euen mad when he by all cruelty tortured the se∣uen Sonnes (as wee find in the bo ke of the Maccabees ) yet was as farre from turning them from their Ceremony of for∣bearing the eating of Swines flesh, that both the mother inui∣ted them, and the Children willingly submitted themselues to Martyrdome. Against this constancy Mahomet, when neither by fained miracles no perswasion, he saw he could preuaile, betooke himselfe to Armes, for the establishment of his disci∣pline which otherwise hee could no wayes haue brought to p sse. And it is strange to see the Iewes at this day, which be∣ing a people dispersed ouer the face of the whole Earth, groa∣ning vnder the seruile yoake of subiection, hauing no King, or supreame gouernour of their owne, haue so obstinately re∣tained their religion, for these three thousand yeeres. What shall I speake of the Mahumetans in Africke and Asia ; of the Indians, the Chinois and other Southerne people, which hauing once setled a platforme of Religious discipline, are im∣pregnable against all persuasion, mainely opposing themselues against the grounds of our Religion, hauing not so much as the principles of nature to support their owne. To let passe the ordinary commerce and trafficke, with Christian nations, which in so euident a case, might probably beget some fruits; the admired Industrie of the Iesuites, erecting their Colleges amongst them, might seeme to promise greater matters. But as I haue credibly beene enforced, by such as haue trauai∣led, as well into Turkie as Africk and India, the euent of their labours hath come so farre short of expectation, that they haue by their conference rather engendred a worse opinion of Christianity. Which though some may impute probably to their indirect meanes and superstitious rites, imposing on the conscience, what God neuer commanded, but rather forbad: Yet who so shall obserue the cunning and subtilty of these Sophisters will rather ascribe it to the peruerse and stubborne disposition of the people, vnapt to receiue any new impressi∣on: For else, who could imagine they could be so power∣full in peruerting and infecting others with their Roman su∣perstition in these parts, hauing their consciences better enfor∣med out of Gods Word, and their vnderstandings ordinarily better taught, in principles, and euery way more strongly fenced against temptation. As these Southerne nations alwaies boasted of their owne Constancy as a prime vertue, so ceased they not to vpbraide the Northerne man with inconstant leui∣ty. This the Italians obiect to the French and Germans (as wee finde in Tacitus. ) The Greekes heretofore to the Ita∣lians, the Cretians to the Graecians, the Hebrewes and Aegyp∣tians to the Greekes and Cretians ; On the other side the o∣ther ha e so much complained of their peruerse and setled su∣perstitions. For to iudge indifferently of either, they are both vices declining from that golden mediocrity, which wee call Constancy. For the defect is leuity, the excesse Pertinacy: and as it is very culpable in any man to turne with euery winde; so it is as great an indiscretion, to be so wedded to our owne opinions or affections as to turne on no occasion: Because all things vnder the sunne are subiect to change and alterati∣on: And therefore it is the part of a wise man to accommo∣date himselfe vnto the obiect, and not in a fond dreame to wrest all the world to his owne fancy. For a wise Sea-man will rather obey the storme then seeke his ruine, and when he cannot recouer the port, will turne to any other point for his owne preseruation. I speake here onely of matters of state and policy, and not of religious actions, otherwise then con∣cerne the externall rites and Ecclesiasticall discipline, the most part of which, by wise men haue been esteemed no other, then matters indifferent which may admit of change & alteration. But here some one might obiect that the French of all Nati∣ons, haue been generally taxed of lightnesse and inconstancy, being notwithstanding in the middle region, more North then the Africans, yet more South then the Germans or Scy∣thians ; I cannot altogether excuse them of this Nationall ble∣mish, yet with their countreyman Bodin, I hold it more fitly tearmed temerity then leuity, being a people very quicke and agill, as well in speech, as action in so much as the executions of matters with them many times are past, re the Spaniard can enter into consolation: for as the Spanish counsell is ouer slow, and full of delayes, so is the French too heady and hasty: and as delay to the one, so rashnes to the other hath proued dangerous. The mediocrity betwixt both being a prompti∣tude or alacrity in effecting matters▪ is to be esteemed as a ver∣tue, which we find in the Italians, whose action is quicke en∣ough, yet commonly grounded on sufficient deliberation; yet if we compare the two extreames, wee shall find the Spanish delayes to haue ouercome the French hastinesse, being farre lesse subiect to errour, then the other. Another difference betwixt the Northerne and Southerne man is discouered in the Affection of Anger and Reuenge. The Northerne man though quickly moued to anger, and very furious, prouokes his enemy to the open field, and after a little time is quickly pacified, forgetting the iniury. The Southerne man contrarywise is not so quickly in aged, but being once prouoked, pursueth his reuenge by secret stratagemes, rather then open fury, and will neuer or very hardly be drawne to re∣conciliation: which base and brutish disposition ariseth not so much out of their euill education (as some haue imagined) as out of melancholy ill tempered. A proofe whereof wee haue in most men amongst vs, of a melancholy disposition, which according to our common prouerbe, threaten danger and ha∣tred implacable: of this disposition were Aiax and M. Corio∣lanus, whereof the former for want of reuenge, in a distracted fury fell on the heards of cattle: the other would by no meanes be reconciled to his Countreymen, till he saw all their Cities in flames. Of the cruelty of the Africans many histories haue giuen testimonies, especially Leo Afer, speaking of the Cartha∣ginian dissention: and with later Writers most memorable is the story of miserable Mulleasses deposed of his Crowne, his eyes burnt out, and his face disfigured, tendring his complaint to the Emperour Charles. This cruelty hath no lesse been ob∣serued in the most Southerne Ameri ans, with whom it is custome to athe their children in the bloud of their slaughte∣red enemies, o drinke their bloud, and banquet with their car∣cases: And if we examine the originall of tortures and seuere lawes, we shall find them originally deriued from the South∣erne people, which the Northerne Man hath seldome vsed but vnwillingly in matters of horrible treason. And not without good reason haue our Lawes taken other courses for the con∣uiction of malefactors in cases of fellony and murther, then the extortion of confession by extreame tortures, a thing common with the Italian ; because (as some of our Statists haue obser∣ued) our Nation is by nature more apt to confession without torture, and so fearefull of torment, that they will more wil∣lingly be brought to the blocke or gallowes, then the racke: whereas the Southerne people by their melancholy temper more fearefull of death, and obstinate in their opinion, will yeeld rather to the greatest torture then confession. Thirdly we shall find as great a disparity betwixt the Nor∣therne and Southerne man in the sluttish carelesnesse of the one, and the cleanly neatnesse of the other. Tacitus reports of the old Germans, that they liued at home in their houses in sordide manner, almost naked, and that they vsed the same roomes as receptacles as well of their beasts as of themselues: which custome we shall not find much changed amongst some, if we read Lipsius speaking of the Westphalians, or haue so much patience elsewhere to make experiment. It is also reported that the Scythians whensoeuer they found themselues oppres∣sed on the way, or in the wars by hunger or thirst, were wont to open a veine vnder their horses eares, and to sucke out their bloud, and to banquet with the flesh, as we read of Tamerlanes Army on the like occasion: but the Southerne people are of a neat and cleanly disposition, abhorring all sordide and vnclean∣ly action, vsing often bathings & washings, not only in sacred and Ecclesiasticall matters, but also in priuate. And therefore no wonder if (as Xenophon among the Ancients reports) that amongst the Persians it were accompted a very vnmannerly thing to spit; or that amongst the Abyssines (as Aluarez writes) it should bee deemed a most hainous and flagitious crime, to drop any filth or spittle in any of their temples. An ar∣gument of this may be their extraordinary affection of neat & dainty delicates, which (as Athen us relates) is most noted in the Asiatickes and Aegyptians, by which meanes M. An∣thony a luxurious spend-thrift, finding himselfe by Cleopatra surmounted, he smiled at his owne ambition in that kinde, and laughed at the Romans his owne Nation as ignorant and barba∣rous. Of the Persian Theophrastus writes, that by a certaine Law certaine great rewards were promised to such men as had inuented any new kindes of Delicates or pleasures, which is a great argument of the licorous affection of this Nation. A fourth difference may be discouered in the conuersation of the Northerne and Southerne Man. For the Scythian and Northerne man is naturally addicted to company and society, as may ap∣peare by the communion of many men in one place in the fields, who amongst the ancients were earmed Nomades, and are now called Hordes ▪ in which manner the Tartars liue at this day▪ also it is well knowne how much the Germans, Brit∣taines, Danes are addicted to company, in so much as they can hardly liue long without companions. But the Southerne man being (as we haue proued) of a melancholy disposition, chuseth rather to liue solitary, and to lurke in woods and desarts, then amongst people: Neere to which nature come the Italians and Spaniards, who affect rather a retired Grauity, then an open Society▪ and conuerse but at a distance, rather for formality the friendship▪ 5 ly , no lesse disparity in the disposition of these nati∣ons shall we find aswel in the Languages they ordinarily vse, as the kinds of musicke which they affects for the former we may generally obserue in the Northerne Languages a rough collisi∣on of consonants and aspirations, as in the German and Bohe∣mian Tongues. Neither is this obserued only in their natiue Tongues, but also in their vse of the Latin Tongue, in pro∣nunciation of which they cannot but mixe rough aspirations; as I haue obserued oftentimes in the Northerne Germans ▪ who commonly pronounce firum for virum; fulgus for vulgus, Pipi for bibi, with diuerse other of the like nature: as vnable they are on the other side to giue any soft aspiration his due sound, but commonly leaue it out altogether, or pronounce either the vocales media for vocales tenues, and aspiratae for mediae, which proceedes altogether from the immoderate strength of hea and force of the spirits: But the Southerne people contrariwise wanting that degree of heat, in their pronunciation abstaine from these hard aspirations and collision of many consonant together, without v wels to mollify the harshnes▪ as we find, in the Greeke, Latin, Spanish, and I alian tongues, which ly neerer to the South. Also the Turkish, Arabian, and Persian tongues are by such as are experienced in them, sayd to bee sweet and elegant. Also it is to bee noted, that as often as the Colonies of the North haue inuaded the South, although re∣taining the same foote steps and originall, haue notwithstan∣ding much altered their pronunciation not onely through the mixture and impression of other languages, but also through the nature of the place, as wee find the Gotish tongue of the Spaniards to be changed to a smoother and sweeter pronun∣ciation, then that which is retained in Scythia. I speake not of the Latin mixtu e, out of the meere Gotish words, which wee shall percei e mollified with more vowels, and set to a sweeter termination. The like may be obserued in the Hebrew tongue, which (as Iosephus Abudachnon, sometimes, a Reader in this Vniuersity obserued) to the eare sounded far sweeter in the Arabian, Turkish, and Persian dialects then its owne ori∣ginall; not that it is in them more perfect (which were im∣piety to beleeue) but because men in pronouncing of a lan∣guage preferring pleasure before significancy, haue mollified it, with soft vowels and aspirations, rather to serue the eare then vnderstanding. No lesse affectation shall wee find of diuerse sortes of musicke, orting with diuerse dispositions. The Northerne mans humour consortes best with the Phrygian measure, a loud and stirring harmony. The Soth rne man ha∣uing his spirits more mollified affects the Lydian: The peo∣ple of the middle region, are most of all delighted with the Doricke, a musicke heretofore vsed in sacred exercises. They who know these measures exactly, and which is agreeable to this or that mans fancy, will giue a probable guesse vnto his naturall disposition. To runne ouer all the differences in manners and customes of the Northerne and Southerne nati∣ons were a matter infinite; wherefore it shall suffice to wrap vp all in generall recapitulation. If wee compare the Nor∣t erne man with the Southerne, wee shall find the one white and red, the other bl cke or tawney; the one big-boned, the other small and dwarfis ; the one strong▪ but eas e to be decei∣ued; the other weake, but witty and circumspect. The one giuen much to wine▪ the other exceeding sober▪ the one ne∣glecting both himselfe and others, the other carefull and cere∣monious: The one rustically arrogant, the other high minded; the one prodigall, the other parsimoniou ▪ The one tempe∣rate, the other lecherous; the one a slouen; the other neat and hand some; the one plaine and simple, the other craftie; the one a Souldier, the other a Priest, the one a Workman, the other a Philosopher; the one standing on the strength of his ands; the other of his wit. Out of the mixture of these extreames, it is no difficult matter to draw the disposition of the middle Nations. For fin∣ding the two extreame nations of the North and the South to be not onely diuerse, but for the most part opposite one to the other, in disposition and manners; it were very ratio∣nall to iudge the middle to haue a mixture of both, which, ob∣seruation wee will proue▪ For if wee compare the middle region with either) the extreames, we shall find no such appa∣rant diuersity▪ as betwixt the extreames themselues▪ Here Monsieur B di dreames of a golden mediocrity to magnifie his owne Countrey, which hee finds in his middle region. For sithence both these extreames challenge an extremitie of dis∣position, hee imagine this middle tract only reserued for ver∣tue and temperance. But if hee iustly weigh all in the ballance of impartiall iudgement, he shall finde no such aduantage. For first out of his owne grounds, to which wee haue hitherto a∣ssented, he ascribes to the extreame nations an eminency both of vice and vertue: Then cannot the middle challenge these qualities otherwise then remitted, and of lesse force. If there∣fore he would haue their inclination to vice more moderated, and corrected; he must also confesse their disposition to vertu∣ous actions to bee of lesse validity. Againe these middle nati∣ons are to bee accompted either directly situate betwixt both the extreames, or more inclining to the one then the other▪ For these directly in the middle, wee must imagine them to partake of both dispositions, as well to vice as to vertue, bor∣rowing from either extreame as well good as bad: Here there∣fore can bee found no disaduantage: For if they will boast of the vertues of either, they must likewise be ashamed of either vices: If they plead a moderation of the former, they must loose so much reputation in the later. For these which more neerely incline to the one then the other, it will bee apparant that as they approach the one in one quality, so they are farther off in another: as if they approach neerer in contemplatiue wit to the Southerne people, so will they come so farre short of the Northerns valour. For by how much more they come neere the vertue of the one, so much come they short of the others Affections. The like may bee iudged of their Imperfections; so weighing reason with reason wee shall find no such inequa∣lity and disproportion to magnifie the one, or vpbraid the o∣ther: for that Almighty Creatour of all things is wont to di∣stribute his blessings in proportion: and Nature his soueraigne hand-maide triumphes in nothing more then variety. Thus haue we spoken as farre as history and obseruation can iustifie, of the lawes, customes, and manners of the Extreame and middle Nations, in which we haue chiefly tied our discourse to the Northerne and Southerne people in this Hemispheare, hauing few histories to leade vs to the consideration of the o∣ther opposite on the Southerne Hemispheare: yet the causes being like, we may out of the former bee able to giue a iudge∣ment of the later. 8 Hitherto haue we treated of the people of the Northerne and Southerne Hemispheares, with the speciall subdiuision of each into Extreame or middle: It now remaines that wee speake of the diuision of Inhabitants according to the Longitude. 9 According to the Longitude, Inhabitants are either in the Easterne Hemispheare, or We∣sterne. Those I tearme of the Easterne which liue betwixt the Canaries and the Molucco Ilands on this side: The Westerne those which dwell betwixt those two on the other. These two Hemispheares of the Earth haue by some beene called the Old and New-world ; because the former containing Europe, Asia, and Africke, hath been knowne to the ancients as the portions of Noahs three Sonnes, Shem, Ham, and Iaphet, whereof (as the Scriptures testifie) Shem had Asia, Iaphet Eu∣ropa, and Ham Africa. The other containing America the South-continent, and some other Ilands, haue beene since dis∣couered. Of the comparison of the Inhabitants of these two Hemispheares we will insert this Theoreme. 1 The people of the Easterne Hemispheare in Science, Religion, Ciuility, Magnifi∣cence, and almost euery thing else, are farre superiour to the Inhabitants of the We∣sterne. For demonstration of this point wee need not spend much time; first, it is manifest that this Hemispheare was peopled a long time before the other, which is a probable argument of their culture and ciuility: because all these matters haue com∣monly their growth & perfection with Time, the mother of all perfection. That this part was peopled a long time before the other, is most credible: for it is plaine out of the Holy Scrip∣tures, that the first off-spring of mankind was in Asia ; whence it could not disperse it selfe into America and other parts of the Earth, till such time as their populous growth had requi∣red larger bounds. The passage from Asia into America with∣out doubt had been performed either by sea or land. By Sea it was improbable they should aduenture in that infancy of the World, when the Art of Nauigation was in her swathing bands, and neither the Chart or Compasse as yet inuented. If by land they made their passage, it was doubtlesse through the North of Asia, supposing America with Asia to bee one Con∣tinent. But this people comming out of a pleasant and tempe∣rate Countrey, would without question first attempt the pla∣ces of the like quality, as most pleasing their eye, and fitting their disposition, before they would inforce their passage to the Icy and frozen Climates of the North, which can only bee beholding to necessity for habitation. Hence without doubt it came to passe, that those Nations wandring farre from their first fountaine, and leauing no sufficient monument to instruct their posterity in their first originall, came short of the other, as well in reuealed as acquired knowledge in reuealed know∣ledge, either sought in Holy Scriptures, or Traditions, they could not but come short; as being most distant from the first head and fountaine where it was to be found in greatest perfe∣ction. In Acquired knowledge gotten by industry and expe∣rience they could not come so farre as the other; because all such knowledge hauing its beginning from obseruation, and its growth with age, could not bee brought to that perfection amongst them, who came more lately to bee a people, and scarce euer endowed with any settled gouernment: but what∣soeuer the causes may bee thought of this diuersity betwixt the people of the Westerne and Easterne Hemispheare, certaine I am that the effect it selfe is most apparant. Of the happy en∣dowments of Europe, Asia, and a good part of Africke, both in Arts liberall and mechanicall, state, policy, magnificence, and Religion, we haue often spoken, and neede make no repetiti∣on. To this if we compare America, being (as it were) the only portion of this Hemispheare, we shall amongst them find few or no Arts either inuented or taught, the vse of letters scarce euer knowne; state and magnificence little regarded, and the Light of Christian Religion scarce euer seene, or at least through the dimme clouds of Roman superstition. Hee that would know more in this matter, let him read Peter Martyr, Cortesius, Acosta, and others, of the naturall disposition of the people of America. 10 The Inhabitants of such Hemispheares are againe subdiuided into the Easterne and We∣sterne : the Westerne in the Easterne Hemi∣spheare, are they who liue neerer the Cana∣ries : the Easterne are such as are situate to∣wards the Moluccoes : to which those other in the Westerne Hemispeare are correspon∣dent. 1 The Westerne people haue been obserued to be more happy and able in martiall discipline: the Easterne in witty contemplation, and specula∣tiue Sciences. There is no small affinity (as wee haue before touched) be∣twixt the West and the North, as betwixt the East and the South ; as well in the temperament of the Aire, as the dispo∣sition of the Inhabitants: which cognation will appeare more fully by the proofe and demonstration of this Theoreme. Of the strength and valour of the Westerne people▪ many records giue euidence; we read of innumerable Colonies of the Celtes a people situate on the West of France, sent into Italy, Grece, & Asia. But the Italians durst neuer inuade France, till such time as their Empire was at the hight vnder Caesar, taking also ad∣uantage of the home-bred enmities of the Inhabitants among themselues, whence Tully the Orator tooke occasion to praise Caesar for subduing those Nations, and reducing them to the Romans obedience, whose strength the Roman Empire could hardly sustaine. The Italians haue oftentimes molested the Graecians, yet from them suffered little or small inconuenience▪ so the Graecians hauing with their Armes cut out a large way through Asia, scarce euer dared to come into Italy but once vnder the conduct of Pyrrhus ▪ who being almost defeated of his Armie, was inforced to saue himselfe by light. In like sort Xerxes who brought men enough into Greece to drye vp the Riuers, was notwithstanding defeated by a few Graecians to his great dishonour. Wherefore Cato had good reason to obiect to Muraena, and Caesar to Pompey, that their wars wa∣ged against the people of Asia in respect of others were (as it were) rather against Women then Men. This without doubt gaue Alexander his greatest happines and victory, that he tur∣ned his Armes against the Easterne people, which were either altogether barbarous, wanting martiall discipline, or all ouer delicate, not able to resist such hardnes: whereas if he had op∣posed the Westerne people (by the censure of Liuy ) hee had at least failed of those many Conquests, if not purchased fatall ouerthrow. The obseruation perhaps of which cou gious va∣lour in the Westerne people was the cause why the Turkes heretofore were wont to chuse their Ianisaries, and chiefe men of warre out of the Europaeans, accompting them more strong and able then the Asiaticks, being of temper more soft and de∣licate. To this accords Iulian in his booke against the Christi∣ans: the Celtes (saith he) are Bold & Aduenturous: the Greeks and Romans both warlike and ciuill: the Egyptians more in∣dustrious and subtile, although weake and tender. The Syri ns with great ala rity conforme themselues to discipline: And a little after hath these words: What shall I declare (saith hee) how coue ous of liberty and impatient of seruitude the Ger∣mans are how quiet and tractable the Syrians, Persians, Par∣thians, and all the Nations situate towards the East and South parts of the World. Tacitus reports, that the Barauians lying on the West of Germany of all the Germans are the strongest and most valiant: which Plutarch also confirmes in the life of Marius, that the most warlike people of all France are these which are most Westerne. The like opinion had Caesar of the Westerne Nations: of all the people of Europe (saith hee) the Westerne people of the Brittaines and Spaniards are the strongest. Now as the Westerne people iustly challenge to themselues this prerogatiue of strength and valour, so must they yeeld to the Easterne, that of Religion and contemplati∣on. To let passe the Indians, which a long time gone, were enriched with knowledge, if we belieue ancient writers; who can deny the Hebrewes, Chaldaeans, Syrians, Aegyptians, A∣rabians, and others of the East their iust trophies of learning and contemplation, which they haue erected to after ages? From these fountaines haue the Greekes and Latins deriued those large streames, wherewith they haue (as it were) wa∣tred all Europe. It is written, That there came wise men from the East to worship Christ ; which must needes bee vnderstood of Chaldaea or the places neere adioyning, where the Magi or Wisemen were had in great reputation. If any obiect the decay both of Learning and Religion at this day, in the easterne parts of the world; Wee answer that this in most parts is meerely Accidentall, caused by the hostile inuasion of the vsur∣ping Turkes, which professe themselues to bee vtter enemies to Learning and the true Religion. To which, wee may adde the ignorance of the Christian Religion in many places, which is the greatest ground of solide knowledge. For amongst all religions in the world, there is none which giueth more way to learning then the Christian: Whereas some others altoge∣ther forbid the studie of such matters; yet is not this inclina∣tion so absurde in the Easterne people, but that euery-where some markes and footesteps will discouer their disposition. For in the East shall wee find no small number of Christian Churches and Monasteries, professing Christianity and other good learning. But to speake no more of the Christian Re∣ligion, which wee hold rather by Gods speciall grace, then nature: the superstitious deuotion of these heathen nations to their owne false religions, is a sufficient argument of their na∣turall inclination to religious exercises. How obstinately per∣uerse, Ceremonious, and superstitious the Indians are found in Idolatrous Religions, I haue often wondred to heare some trauaylers reporte: Of the other Hemispheare comprehen∣ding America, I haue as yet small euidence out of History, whereon to ground any certainty; all we can say shall be com∣prized in this Theoreme. 2 The easterne part of the westerne Hemispheare was peopled before the westerne. This proposition seemes probably warranted, as well by reason as authority; for first, supposing as an infallible ground, that the first ofspring of all nations was in Asia, towards the East ; it must needs follow, that to people America, there should be a passage thereunto out of Asia ; because America was a long time not inhabited ere it was discouered to the Eu∣ropaeans. This passage then, was either by Sea or Land: Were it by sea, the first part whereat they could arriue was the ea∣sterne side. If wee suppose it to be by land (as is most likely in those ancient times) yet was it most probable it should bee on the North-east side from the Pole, because it is found by ob∣seruation that on the North-west side it is diuided from Asia by streites, then must they first touch on the Easterne part. To this we may adde the experience of the Castilians and Portu∣galls (who first discouered this part) who affirme that the peo∣ple dwelling on that side, haue beene obserued to surpasse the westerne by farre in ciuility of manners, knowledge, and such endowments, which may bee an argument of the antiquity of their plantation. CHAP. XV. 1. T He second diuersity of disposition of inhabitants ariseth from the di∣uerse nature of the Soile: Here fowre distinctions of Nations are remarkeable. 1 Of the Inhabitants of the Mountaines and plaine-Countreyes. 2 Of marish and dry. 3. Of windy and quiet. 4. Of sea-borders and Iland -people. That mens dispositions are diuersly varied according to the temper of the soile, euery mans owne experience may easily enforme him; for to reserue particular instances to their pro∣per places, it is most manifest that all the vitall operations of the soule depends as well vpon the corporeall and organicall parts, as the spirits ; which being diuersely affected by the qua∣lities of the Aire, and Earth must needes vary and suffer a change. Plaine and euident dis arity is found: first betwixt two nations situate in the same Parallell or climate in respect of the heauens. Secondly, betwixt two men borne in seuerall Countreyes liuing together for some time, in the same region. Thirdly, of one and the selfe-same man liuing at diuerse times in diuers regions. Fourthly, of a man liuing in the same Coun∣trey at diuerse seasons and times; all which being heretofore demonstrated will declare vnto vs the great Sympathy, and operation the Aire and his diuerse qualities, hath with, and on our corporeall spirits and organs. But the temperament of the Aire (as we haue formerly shewed) depends on the tempera∣ture of the soile: whence it must needs follow that the natu∣rall disposition of men should bee varied somewhat in respect of the soyle. This disposition of the soile being manifold, wee haue reduced onely to three heads: leauing other curiosities to such, as haue more leasure: What wee iudge in this, shall be declared in these Theoremes. 1 Mountaine people are for the most pa t more stout, warlike and generous then those of plaine Countreyes : yet lesse tractable to gouernment. Of the warlike disposition of the mountanists and their strange Impatience to subiection, many Histories giue testi∣mony Geographers repor, that setting aside the people of the North (to whom for strength and valour wee haue giuen the palme,) the Inhabitants of the mountaine Atlas are great and strong, out of whom the Kings of Numidia and Mauritania in time of warre are wont to leuy their forces. And it is worthy admiration to consider the mountaine peo∣ple of Arabia, who could neuer be drawne to yeeld to sub∣iection, but being fortified not somuch by the benefit of the place (as some might happily imagine) but rather by naturall strength and valour, haue alwaies liued in liberty. To whom (as is reported) the Turkes giue a yeerely stipend to keepe them off from inuading the Territories of Palaestine and Da∣mascus. Of the Ma sians the ancient inhabitants of the Appenine mountaines in Italy, the Romans were wont so well to conceiue, that it grew into a prouerbe: Sine Marsis triumphasse neminem. Gostane, when he went about to in∣uade the kingdome of Succia, chose his legions of souldiers, out of the Dalecarly, who inhabite the Succian mountaines. But amongst all, no nation hath purchased a greater opinion and reputation then the Heluetians, liuing amongst the Alpes. These men are originally descended from the Succians, which for valour, haue o farre approued themselues, that they haue not onely kept themselues free from forraigne iurisdiction, but haue often deliuered their neighbouring countries from sla∣uery and oppression▪ Against the house Austria they haue not once displaied their banners, and triumphed in their ouer∣throw. A great part of Germany hath smarted vnder their valour; and such an honorable opinion haue they wonne, that they are accompted (as it were) the Censors and moderators to decide controuersies in matters of state and kingdomes. Ci∣cero giues grrat commendations of strength to the Ligurgians inhabiting the mountaines: It is well knowne how long and tedious warres the mountaine Cilicians and Acr cerauneans had with the Turkes: how long with small damage they endured affront, and droue them back▪ Here we might add the examples of the Biscanes and Cantabrians in Spaine, who vn∣der the conduct of Pelagius their King, withstood the Sara¦cens, and preserued both their language and religion. The like ought to be spoken of the Welsh & Cornish people amongst vs, as of the Scottish Highlander : all which liuing in mountanous countries haue withstood the violence of forraigners, and for many y ares preserued their owne liberty. And howso uer it may be obiected that the aduantage of the place gaue them courage, yet can wee not deny their disposition due com∣mendation; hauing not only thus for a time protected their owne rights, but made many hostile inuasions on their ene∣mies. Hence Bodin would make a certaine Harmony betwixt the mountaine people, and the Northerne, esteeming the inha∣bitants of the Alpes, the Pyraeneans, the Acroceraunij the in∣habitants of Haemus, Carpathus, Olympus, Taurus, Stella, Caucasus, Imaeus, with diuerse others of the same nature, al∣beit situate in the temperate part, to bee accompted nor∣therne people: as also farther towards the South, the inhabi∣tants of A las, of the Arabian mountaines, of Pirus, and Se∣raleona, are (as it were) by him excepted from the Southerne inhabitants, in regard of their high and mountanous situation ; which recompenseth the other, and challengeth asmuch cold, as by the heauens it should seeme to receiue heat. This con∣ceit of a Monsieur Bodin, I admit without any great contradic∣tion, were he not ouer peremptorie in ouermuch censuring all mountanous people of blockishnesse and barbarisme, against the opinion of Auerroes a great writer; who finding these people neerer heauen suspected in them a more heauenly na∣ture. Neither want their many reasons, drawne from nature and experiment, to proue mountanous people, to bee more pregnant in wit and guifts of vnderstanding then others, in∣habiting low and plaine Countries. For howsoeuer wit and valour are many times diuided, as wee haue shewed in the northerne and southerne people, yet were they neuer so much at variance, but they would sometimes meete. First there∣fore what can speake more, for the witty temper of the moun∣taine people, then their cleare and subtile Aire being farre more purged and rarified, then that in low countries: For holding the vitall spirits to bee the chiefest instruments in the soules operation, no man can deny but they sympathrize, es∣pecially with the aire their chiefest foment. Euery man may by experience finde his intellectuall operations more vigorous in a cleare day, and on the contrary most dull and heauy when the aire is any way affected with foggy vapours. What wee finde in our selues in the same place at diuerse seasons, may we much more expect of places, diuersely affected in constituti∣on. A second reason for the proofe of our assertion, may bee drawne from the thinne and spare diet, in respect of those o∣thers. Forpeople liuing on plaines, haue commonly all com∣modities in such plenty, that they are much subiect to surfe∣ting and luxurie, the greatest enemy and vnderminer of all in∣tellectuall operations. For a fat-belly commonly begets a grosse head, and a leane braine: But want and scarcity the mo∣ther of frugality, inuites the mountaine dwellers to a more sparing and wholsome diet. Neither growes this conuenience onely out of the scarcity of viandes, but also out of the nature of the diet. Birds, Fowles and Beasts, which are bred vp∣on higher places, are esteemed of a more cleanely and whole∣some feeding, then others liuing in fennes and foggy places: And how farre the quality of our diet preuailes in the altera∣tion of our organs and dispositions ; euery naturalist will easily resolue vs. A third reason may bee drawne from the cold Aire of these mountanous regions, which by an Antiperistasis keepes in, and strengthens the internall heat, the chiefe in∣strument in naturall and vitall operations. For who per∣ceiues not his vitall, and by consequence his intellectuall parts, in cold frosty weather to be more strong and vigorous, then in hot and soultry seasons, wherein the spirits are more diffused and weakened. This disparity in the same region, at diuerse times, in regard of the disposition of the aire, may easily declare the disparity of diuerse Regions, being in this sort diuersely affected. A fourth reason may bee taken from the customary hardnesse, whereunto such people inure them∣selues from their infancy; which (as Huartus proues) begets a better temper of the braine, in regard of the wit and vnder∣standing; which wee happen to finde cleane otherwise with them, who haue accustomed themselues to delicatenesse. These reasons perhaps would seeme onely probable, and of no great moment, were they not strengthened with forraigne and Do∣mest cke obseruation. Haue not the Heluetians situate amongst the mountaines, giuen sufficient testimony; especially in the infancy of our Reformation ? Haue not the Sueuians and Silesians shewed themselues able enough, to wipe off the blot of a blockish disposition; yet hauing a situation wilde and mountainous? Had that great Doctour Reu lin iudged well of the nature of such people, hee would not haue made it so great a wonder as hee did, that wilde Sueuia should produce such learned Men. Forraigne influences elsewhere wherein all histories abound, I forbeare to relate; desirous ra∣ther to bee accompted deficient then tedious. Should I draw home to my natiue Westerne Confines, to which I owe my breath, I should perhaps by some be taxed of partiality or af∣fectation. Should I mention our ancient Brittaines, inhabiting the Mountainous Countrey of Wales, or the greater part of the Scottish Nation, inioying the like condition of life, and dis∣position of the Soyle; I might at once winne loue, and stirre vp enuy. Neuerthelesse, as a man by nature borne carelesse of Detraction, yet most respectiue of Friendship, I had rather ven∣ture my credit, then preiudice the truth: betwixt both which with mee the choice is easie. Mine owne Countrey of Deuon, which duty commands me to make the first Instance, I had ra∣ther set on the stage of Enuy, then Dishonour. I am not of the opinion of the vaine-glorious Greekes, who boasting too much of their owne perfections, esteemed all Nations else Barbarians. Yet to checke M r Bodins bold coniecture, out of which hee could finde but one Anacharsis in all Scythia ; I will demonstrate that our mountainous Prouinces of Deuon and Cornwall, haue not deserued so ill, as to bee so sharply censured for Blockishnesse or Inciuility. Barren Coun∣tries haue been known to nourish as good wits, as Bodin, Ari∣stippus the Philosopher, Callimachus the Poet, Eratosthenes the Mathematician, haue not been ashamed to call Cyrene in E∣gypt their natiue Country, a Mountainous and Rocky Region. Neither can it bee stiled our reproach, but glory, to draw our off-spring from such an Aire which produceth wits as emi∣nent as the Mountaines, approaching farre neerer to Heauen in Excellency, then the other in hight transcend the Valleyes. Wherein can any Prouince of Great Brittaine challenge pre∣cedency before vs? Should any deny vs the reputation of Arts and Learning: the pious Ghosts of Iewell, Raynolds, and Ho ∣ker, would rise vp in opposition; whom the World knowes so valiantly to haue displayed their Banners in defence of our Church and Religion. Should they exclude vs from the repu∣tation of knowledge in State and Politicke affaires? who hath not acquainted himselfe with the name of S • William Petre our famous Benefactor, whose desert chose him chiefe Secre∣tary to three Princes of famous memory? Who hath not known or read of that prodigie of wit and fortune S • Walter Raleigh, a man vnfortunate in nothing else but the greatnesse of his wit and aduancement? whose eminent worth was such, both in Domesticke Policie, Forreigne Expeditions, and Discoueries, Arts and Literature, both Practicke and Contemplatiue, which might seeme at once to conquerre both Example & Imitation. For valour and chiualrous Designes by Sea ▪ who reades not without admiration the acts of S r Francis Drake, who thought the circuit of this Earthly Globe too little for his generous and magnanimous Ambition? Of S r Richard Grenuill, who vndertaking with so great a disaduantage, so strong an Ene∣my▪ yet with an vndaunted Spirit made his Honour legible in the wounds of the proud Spaniard: and at last triumphed more in his owne honourable Death, then the other in his base conquest? Of S r Humfrey Gilbert, S r Richard Hawkins, Dauies, Fr bisher, and Captaine Parker, with many others of worth, note, & estimation, whose names liue with the Ocean? In the Catalogue of able and worthy Land-Souldiers, whose eye would not at first, glance on my Lord Belfast, who lately deceased to the great griefe of his Countrey, because in such a time which most requires his assistance? Courage, & Wisdome. which are often at odds, and seldome meet, in him shooke hands as friends, and challenged an equall share in his perfe∣ctions. His wife managing of his affaires in Ireland, so well commends his owne Loyalty, and his Masters choice, that the whole Realme may truly be said for the most part to owe her present Peace to his industrie. should I speake of Generous Magnificence and Fauour of Learning, shewed by Heroicall Spirits in the generall Munificence extended to our whole V∣niuersity; what Age or Place can giue a Paralell to renowned Bodley, whose name carries more perswasion then the tongue of the wisest Orator? His magnificent Bounty, which shewed itselfe so extraordinarily transcendent, aswell in erection of his Famous Library, which he (as another Ptolomy ) so richly furnisht, as other munificent Largesses, exhibited to our En∣glish Athens, was yet farther crowned by his wise choice, as proceeding from one, who being both a great Scholler, and a prudent Statist, knew aswell how to direct as bestow his li∣berality. If Founders and Benefactours of priuate Colledges may find place in this Catalogue of Worthies, the sweet hi e and receptacle of our Westerne wits can produce in honour of our Country a famous Stapledon Bishop of Excester, and wor∣thy Founder of Exon Colledge : whose large bounty was after∣ward seconded (next to Edm▪ Stafford Bishop of Sarum, a We∣sterne Man) by the pious charge and liberality of M r Iohn Pe∣ryam, S r Iohn Acland, & very lately by M r D r Hakewill, whose worthy Encomium, (though vnwillingly) leaue out, lest I should seeme rather to flatter them commend his Worth. But what needes he my poore mention? His learned works publi∣shed to the World, & his Pious Monument bestowed on our House, speake in silence more thē I can vtter out of the highest pitch of Inuention. To all which I might adde M r Nicholas Wadham ▪ whose liberall hand hauing augmented the number of our Colledges with an absolute and compleat Foundation, haue left Muses enough to preserue his Name vnto eternity. Had I the lik priuiledge to mention the liuing as the dead, we should not finde wanting out of the ashes of these generous Heroes, of our Deuonian confines, many genuine and worthy Sonnes standing vp in their Fathers places, to shew the world a succession aswell of wits as times. There would appeare at once vpon the stage our famous D r Sutcliffe, the worthy Dean of Excester, whose magnanimous endeauours, aswell in his learned conflicts with our pernicious Romanists, as in erecting a Colledg to oppose our sworne enemies, the Iesuites, will (no doubt) lengthen out the end of his declining age with Fame and immortality. I could offer to your admiration the Worth and Workes of our renowned Rector, D r Prideaux, His Ma∣iesties learned Professour of Diuinity in our Vniuersitie, in whom the Heroicall wits of Iewell, Rainolds, and Hooker, as vnited into one, seeme to triumph anew, and threaten a fatall blow to the Babilonish Hierachie: Insomuch that hee may iustly challenge to himselfe that glory, which sometimes Ouid speaking of his owne country; Mantua Virgilium laudet, Verona Catullum, Romanae gentis gloria dicar ego. Mantua Virgill, Verone Catullus praise, I will the glory of the Romans rayse. Neither want the lawes of our Land, out of this one source, sufficient props to defend their Countries and the Kingdomes right. The admired sufficiency of Iustice Doddrige, testified to the world by so large a report, and expressed in his incom∣parable skill in the Lawes (besides his indowments of Artes and other Learning, seconded by the deserued Fame of M r William Noy ) can hardly scape my pen, being so deeply dipped in the midle of my Natiue Countrey. I care not what enuy I stirre vp in others, so my mother Excester Colledge, which sometimes cherished in her bosome these two worthy Dar∣lings, and since found her curtesie returned back with interest, indulgently permit me this liberty. Besides these choice floures cropt from our Hesperian gar∣den, no question but many more would be found out aliue or dead; whom fame, if not iniurious, cannot suffer to sleepe without deserued memory. I haue hitherto touched such e∣minent wits and persons, of whom for their profession sake the Church or Common-wealth haue greater reason to take especiall notice. Many inferiour faculties are yet left where∣in our Da o hath displaied her abilities aswell as in the for∣mer, as in Philosophers, Historians, Oratours and Poets, the blazoning of whom to the life, especially the last, I had ra∣ther leaue to my worthy friend M r . W. Browne ; who as hee hath already honoured his countrie in his elegant and sweete Pastoralls ▪ so questionles will easily bee intreated a litle far∣ther to grace it, by drawing out the line of his Poeticke Aun∣cesters, beginning in Iosephus Iscanus, and ending in himselfe. Bodin perhaps might oppose against vs the eminency of his Parisian territoy, as some with vs the glory of our Me ropolis and Vniuersities, disdaining all comparison: But to this it is not hard to shape an answere, 1. That a Metropolis or Vni∣uersity is to be imagined as a common receptacle of the most selected wits deriued rather from other places then the tem∣perament of their owne Aire: Insomuch as they may be said to owe their abilities, for the most part, to those to whom they owe their wealth. Neither can they challenge a greater interest in this glory, then our Townsmen heere in Oxford in the eminent guifts of our choicest Schollers ; besides, that often happens in our great Metropolitan cities by the promiscuous concurse of diverse dispositions; which is reported of the beasts once a yeare comming together to drinke of Nilu , of diuerse sorts; that by vnnaturall commixture, they yeare∣ly beget new monsters: Africa aliquid semper oportat noui. 2. The ready meanes of Aduancement to high and eminent dig∣nityes in Metropolitan cityes, which are commonly the ordi∣ ary seates of Princes, sets many a braine a worke although In vita Minerua, to shew it selfe in publike: wherein hee hath the aduantage of estimation sooner then sufficiency : wher∣as many a towardly wit in places farre remote, neuer finds op∣portunity so propitious as to present him to popularity. I feare I shall be too tedious in this point, recalling to minde that I shall find few of my readers in this matter so affected as my selfe: yet should I not haue spunne out this theame so long, but to stop their mouthes who being sooner taught to speake then vnderstand, take aduantage of the rude lang age nd plaine attire of our countrymen, admiring nothing more then themselues or the magnificent splendour of their owne habitation: As though all the witt in the world were annex∣ed to their owne schoooles, and no flowres of science could grow in another garden: But a rude dialect being more in∣debted to Custome then Nature, is a small argument of a bloc∣kish disposition: and a homely outside may shroud more wit then the Silke-wormes industrie. I haue sometimes heard a rude speach in a Frize habite, expresse better sense then at other times a scarlet Robe : And a plaine Yeoman with a mat∣ ocke in his hand speake more to the purpose, then some Counsellours at the barre: And what other prorogatiue can such men appropriate to themselues aboue vs, but toyes and formalities, the Idols of Gulls and fooles, and the laughter of solide vnderstandings? But now after all this bickering with M r Bodin to grow to a reconcilement, ere we part, wee will part stakes, and in the way of kindnesse giue him this one dis∣tinction, which I hope for quietnesse sake, he will accept. The naturall disposition of men and their guifts of vnder∣standing and mentall faculties, arise either from their natu∣rall Temper, or their Discipline and education : For the former I haue small reason to giue (as I haue said) the excellencie to the inhabitants of plaine and low Countries, rather then to the mountaine people: But in discipline and education I must confesse others commonly to be happier. 1. Because the Fer∣tility and increase of the Earth inuiting men to such an Habi∣tation, it must needes happen that such countries must bee more populous, and by consequence settle to themselues a better forme of gouernment, then those which by reason of their barren soile are more neglected: 2. Because, most Cities and Townes, where are found the chiefest meanes of Instituti∣on of youth, are founded in plaine Countries and vallies. This Perfection that such regions boast of, is owed rather to In∣stitu ion then Nature : Hence appeares the reason of the last clause of our Theoreme, to wit, why they should be lesse trac∣table to gouernment: Because being (as it were) borne to too much liberty, they cannot so well inure themselues to subiec∣tion, as other who perhaps know no Condition but seruitude of the mountainous people of Wales and Scotland, I cannot speake so much as intended: Both because I haue (I feare) tired already my readers patience, as also for that, being not to conuersant in their His ories as mine owne, as an ill herald, I may chance to marshall all amisse. Who o list to reade the courage of our ancient British nation, hee shall find enough as well in the Roman Story, as our English Chronicles, to set them far enough aboue contempt, and place them an eye sore in the sight of enuy. But to leaue Antiquities & come to these times, we may easily amongst many other deseruing men single out some, whose eminence so obuious to the eye of common ob∣seruation, is able to dash detraction out of countenance. Who hath not heard not many yeeres since of D r Holland the Kings Professour in our Vniuersity, and S r Roger Williams a famous Coronell in the French and Belgicke warres? The Scholasti∣call Learning of the one, and the martiall prowesse of the o∣ther, was too well knowne to require a Panegyricke. Neither is Wales at this day below her selfe, but that she can triumph in two of the most Honourable and Generous Peeres of this Land, (to whose acceptance I owe these my poore labours) and the gr atest Administratour of Iustice in our Courts: the two former, borne as well to hereditary vertue as greatnesse: the later aduanced no higher then his owne ability, whom the world knowes beyond my expression. Scarce had I shut vp this tedious discourse, spent for the most part in defence of my natiue Countrey, but surprized with a deepe melancholy, I entred into a serious consideration of what I had too rashly spoken: I called my meditatiōs to a strict accompt, to examine what motiue should make me run so far beyond my intended purpose, to meet the Ambition of my Countrey or mine owne affection. The remembrance of some grieuances, seconded by mine inbred Nature, neuer taught to fawne on misprision, began to checke my officious pen, as guil∣ty of too much weaknesse or adulation: when suddainly as in a vision there appeared vnto me my Mother Oxford vsher'd in by Isis & all his Muses, who with a discontented countenance and harsh language, seemed to chide me in this manner: Fond Sonne, who taught thy vndeserued praise, To crown thy country with these thanklesse Baies? What owest thou vnto that barren Earth But harsh reproach, sad cares, and haplesse Birth? What Legacie bequeath'd that soile to thee, But fruitlesse Hopes, and helplesse Pouerty? What thou hast spoken of thy Westerne stronds▪ Will sooner plough vp mine, then cure thy wounds. Had thy neglected Muse without a Name, Spent halfe this industry to spinne my fame, Isis had graced thee with Muses more Then euer tript on thy Deuonian shore. Which of these Worthies whom thou crown'st with praise Will ere thy wants relieue, or Fortunes raise? All the proud wooers of the Sisters Nine, Like Pilgrims come to worship at my shrine: And vauntest thou on Deuons part their Names Who owe to me their worth, to her their shames? The prime and choice of all thy glorious flowres Cropt from my gardens and admired Bowres, Ought to returne the tribute of their praise Vnto my golden tongue and learned Layes: Nor had thy Westerne Confines euer found A Muse to sing of thy Deuonian ground, Had not I touched her ambitious tongue First taught to chaunt amongst my learned throng. How oft hast thou drawne out thy precious time To tutour in my armes their youthly prime, Who like respectlesse and vntutour'd swaines, With losse and obloquie reward thy paines? Such are thy Darlings whom thou mak'st to ride In a triumphant carre by Honours side: As if proud Honour which can Kings command, As a poore seruant waited on thy hand. Thus thou vnwise giu'st immortality To those, whose base reproches follow thee. Had thine Ambition waited on my springs, The breath of Princes, and the pow'r of Kings Had seconded thy Hopes, which now accuse To my disgrace and griefe thy haplesse Muse. Thy wants inforce thee still with me to stay, When each Pedant or makes or findes his way. To play and stake it at that lawlesse Game, Selling my Honours for to buy their shame: Vnhappy purchase ow'd to Charity, Bought by conniuence, sold to Periury; By griping Brokers, since the fatall time That faire Astraea left thy thankelesse Clime. Thus thy admired Deuons charity Sets strangers in her lappe and shuts out Thee. Hast thou been honour'd by my sacred Breath, 'Mongst rude Arcadians thus to beg a Death? What greater glory can thy ashes haue, Then in my flowry groues to dig thy graue? Although the least among my learned sonnes, Thy fortunes told thee that I lou'd thee once, And so doe still: although my haplesse Baies Taught thy despaire to spinne out carelesse dayes, And to compose thy discontented Head To slumber softly on the Muses Bed. Be rul'd by me my poore, yet loued Son, Trust not their smiles whose wrongs haue thee vn∣done: Thy faire Hopes grounded on thy place of birth, Will fly in Atomes or consume in Earth; Before within that Hemispheare of thine, Thy Deuons Sunne on thee shall euer shine. Then trust vnto my bounty, turne thy sight From thy darke Confines to my golden light. All thy endowments owed to my wombe, Returne them back, and there erect thy tombe. If no Mecenas crowne thee with his Rayes, Teach thy content to sleepe out quiet dayes. Let Contemplation with transpiercing eyes, Mount thee a pitch beyond the starry skyes. And there present thee that eternall glasse, Wherein the greatnesse of this wondrous masse, Shrinkes to an A ome ▪ where my Astrolube Shall shew thee starres beyond thy painted Globe: Where thou aloft as from a mountaine steepe, Shalt see the greatest men like Antes to creepe: Thy dayes shall minister thee choicest Theames, Which night shall render in delicious dreames▪ And thy seuere Philosophy the whiles, In amourous kinde shall courte thee with her smiles, Or if thy nature with constraint, descends Below her owne delight, to practick endes; Rise with my morning Phaebus, slight the West, Till furrowed Age inuite thee to rest. And then perchance, thy Earth which seldome gaue, Thee Aire to breath, will lend thy Corps a graue, Soone the last trumpet will be heard to sound, And of thy load Ease the De o ian ground. Meane time if any gentle swaine come by, To view the marble where thy ashes ly, He may vpon that stone in fewer yeeres, Engraue an i ph with fret ing teares, Then make mens frozen hearts with all his cries Drink in a drop from his distilling eyes: Yet will I promise thy neglected bones A firmer monument then speachles stones, And when I pin with age, and wits with rust, Seraphick Angells shall dreserue thy dust, And all good men acknowledge shall with me Thou lou'st thy Countrey, when she hateth thee. This strange reproofe of an indulgent mother, I could not entertaine without passion: In so much as without feare or wit, I aduentured in this sort, to answer her, in her owne language. Ad Matrem Academiam. haue my former yeeres So much on thy hate, or these my teares? Thus to diuorce me from my place of birth, To be a stranger to my natiue Earth? Wilt thou expose him on thy common stage, To striue and struggle in an Iron age; Whose low ambition neuer learn'd of thee The curious Artes of thriuing policy? Thy golden tongue from which my yonger dayes Suckt the sweet musick of thy learned layes, Was better taught thy office then my fate, To make me thine, yet most vnfortunate. Why was I fostred in thy learned schooles, To study with for the reward of fooles: That while I sate to he re the Muses sing, The Winter suddenly ore-took my Spring: Haue I so played the truant with my howres, Or with base riot stained thy sacred Bowres, Or as a Viper did I euer striue, To gnaw a passage through thy wombe to thriue: To pluck me thus from Deuons brest, to try What thou canst doe when as thy dugges are dry? When my short thread of life is almost spunne, Thou biddst me rise vp with thy morning Sun; And like a Heliotrope adore the East, When my care-hastened Age arriues at West. Could I encounter (as I once did hope,) The God of learning in the Horoscope, My Ph bu would auspicious lookes incline, On my hard fate, and discontents to shine: Now lodged in a luckles house, reiects My former suites, and frownes with sad aspects. Had I been borne when that eternall hand Wrapt the infant world in her first swadling band, Before Philosophy was taught the way, To rock the cradle in which Nature lay, My Learning had been Husbandry: My Birth Had ow'd no toll but to the virgine Earth: No ha I courted for these thi y yeeres, Thy seuen proud minions with officious teares: To liue had been my industry: no tongue Had taxt thy honours, guilty of my wrong. Had I been shepheard on our Westerne plaines, I might haue sung amongst those happy swaines; Some shepheardesse hearing my melody, Might haue been charmed kind as charity, And taught me those sad minutes to repriue, Which I haue lost in studying how to thriue. Had I aduetur'd on the brinish fome, And sworne my selfe a stranger to my home Till time the Haruest reapt my youth did owe, And Ages winter had spent all her snow Vpon my haires; what worser could I haue, Then loose thy frownes to find a wished graue? The Scythian hewne from Caucasus would aske efore my slaughter, why a needles taske Of Trauaile I should vndert ke, to see Their Countreyes bounds and my sad misery? But hearing my harsh bondage vnder thee, Would thine vnkindnesse hate and pi ty me. To see thy Child far seuer'd from thy wombe The Canniball would make himselfe my tombe; And till his owne were spent preserue my dust, In his deere vrne which thou hast sleightly lost. Canst thou neglected see his Age to freeze, Whose youth thou dandl'st on indulgent knees? The fowle aspersions on my Deuon throwne, Thou mightst in right acknowledge for thine owne Only this difference: to men wanting worth They sell preferments, and thou sends them forth. Canst thou be brib'd to honour with a kisse Thy guilded folly which deserues the hisse? If thy fo 'd wants and flattery conspire, To sell thy Scarlet to a worthles Squire, Or grace with miniuere some proselite Who nere knew artes, or reade the Stagirite ; Yet should thy hand be frugall to preserue That stock for want of which thy sonnes may starue. Haue I seru'd out three prentiships, yet find Thy trade inferiour to the humblest mind? And that outstript by vnthrifts, which were sent Free with indentures ere their yeeres were spent? Then cease, yee sisters of the Thespian springs, Thalia burne thy books and breake thy strings, And mother make thy selfe a second Tombe For all thy ofspring, and so shut thy wombe. Accuse not my iust anger, but the cause Nature may vrge, but fury scornes her lawes. I fawn'd too long on Iustice: Sith that failes, Storme Indignation and blow vp my sailes; Ingenious choller arm'd with Scorpions stings Which whipp'st on Pesants, and commandest Kings, And giu'st each milky soule a penne to write Though all the world turned a parasite ; O Temper my braines, thy bitternesse infuse, Descend and dictate to my angry Muse. O pardon mother something checkes my spleene, And from thy face takes off my angry teene: Reuolted Nature by the same degrees Goes and returnes; begges pardon on her knees: Thou art a mirrour by reflexion taught To faigne defects, yet guilty art of naught. Thy stewards which by thy indulgence thriue Were they as iust, as thou art free to giue, We all might share a portion of that store, Which now thy sonnes deserue, thy slaues deuoure. Thy will is seldome measur'd by the Law, But power, whose greatnesse thy Edicts can awe, Slights thy decrees: O would Imperiall Ioue But once descend from his high Court aboue, To see thy innocent and maiden hands, By thine owne seruants basely shut in bands: These Caterpillars by his three-forkt Rayes, Would soone be scorch'd from of thy sacred Bayes ; And thou restor'd vnto that pristine-hue, Which ancient times admir'd ours neuer knew. All this time as in a fit of phrensy I haue spoken, I scarce know what my selfe: I feare mee too much, to, or of, my Countrey and Vniuersity, and too little for the present pur∣pose. Now as one suddainly awaked out of sleep, no otherwise then in a dreame I remember the occasion : We haue all a semel Insaniuimus, and as a learned man of this Vniuersity seemes to maintaine, no man hath euer had the happinesse to be exemp∣ted from this imputation: And therefore I hope my Reader will pardon mee this once, if in such a generall concourse and conspiracy of mad men, I sometimes shew my selfe mad for company. 3 Windy Regions produce men of wild and in∣stable dispositions; but quiet regions more con∣stant and curteous. The cause of this disparity is apparant; because a quiet mind, and apt for contemplation, cannot bee in such a man, as is perpetually tossed to and fro. For no man can well con∣template, except hee haue his mind purged and free from motion of the body; and it is noted by Physiognomers that wiser men are slower in the motion of their body and mind, whereas mad and franticke men are alwaies busied in body and mind. Hence a reason may be giuen why Mariners and sea∣men being continually tossed with the wind, are obserued to be more barbarous, inhumane, and inconstant. Another reason of this inconstancie and change, may bee drawne from the change of the Aire, caused by diuersity of winds; For wind being an exhalation affecting the aire and deriued from the Earth, must needs be diuerse in regard of the diuerse regions, from whence it bloweth. what cause soeuer be imagined, it is most certaine that people in windy regions haue been more warlike, though perhaps lesse humane: As in Thracia, France, Circassia, Lybia, Portugall, Persia, Noruegia, and Polonia : But in places in the same tract where the wind hath a lesse domination we shall find them more tractable, but lesse vali∣ant, as Asyria, Asia minor, Italy for the most part, and Egypt. In like manner the people of Gallia Nar onensis, Aquitany, and Prouence in France, are obserued to bee the most warlike, although situate in a more Southerne tract: Being daily infe∣sted, partly by the Vulturnus, partly by the Corus, which in these parts hath great power. 4 Sea-borderers are generally more witty and a∣dorned with more knowledge, then Inlanders, though subiect to greater vices. That Artes, Ciuility, and many inuentions are owed to the sea, as the mother of encrease, seemes a matter out of question: For sith all nations haue not found out all arts and inuentions it must follow necessarily, that they haue been propagated by traffick, and commerce with forraine nations: Whence it comes to passe many times that Sea-borderers by conference with out-landish people, haue gotten that knowledge and ex∣perience of things, for which others haue with great cost and danger aduentured on long and tedious trauailes: Which I take to bee the reason why Themisto les would haue a Citie depending on the sea, and not as Caelius Rhodoginus imagines, that hee might transferre the power from the Nobility, to the Ship-masters. Thus we find scienc s and learning to haue been deriued from the Chaldeans to the Egyptians, from the Egyp∣tians to the Phaenicians, from them to the Grecians and Ro∣mans: And in our dayes euery man can speake how much the industrie of the Venetians, Spaniards, Hollanders, English, and Portugalls haue effected in both Indies, in trafficking with them, deriuing together with their merchandize, much of their owne knowledge and religion. But as the Ilanders and sea-bordering people haue excelled the Inland nations in skill and knowledge, so also in vices: Which stands with reason, whether we ascribe it to their naturall wit or condition of life, or education. For the greatest wits are commonly matched with the greatest vices, as depending on such a temper of the braine whose smallest change may beget madnesse: accor∣ding to that prouerbe, Nullum magnum ingenium sine mixtu∣ra insaniae. Also Artes and Sciences turned to the worst vse, become more dangerous, then naked simplicity ; for there is nothing to be feared more then armed furie. This might bee the cause why Plato in his booke de Republica warnes men to auoid the Sea, as the mother of wickednesse. Which is secon∣ded by Strabo, who deriues the of-spring of Robbery, pillage, and murther, from the Sea: By which argument, the old A∣thenians were induced to draw the Inhabitants as much as they could from Sea-trafficke to husbandry and tillage of the Earth: Whence came at first (as some imagine) that fable of Neptune striuing with Minerua for victory, against whom she preuailed, by shewing the iudges a mandrakes apple as an es∣peciall rarity of the land. CHAP. XVI. Of the dispositions of Inhabitants according to their Originall and Education. 1 I N the third place there may be a di∣uersity of Inhabitants in dispositi∣on, either in respect of their Of-spring, or their Education. In the former we are to consider the dispositions of nations so farre forth, as it depends from their first stocke and originall. By the first stocke and originall of nations, wee vnderstand not here either the first ofspring from the loynes of Adam, or the second from Noah ; because these two are common to all nations of the world, and therefore cannot vary the seue∣rall dispositions of people: But the more mediate or speciall stocke whence they sprang, which is found to haue no small power in the nature and temper of posterity. In this of-spring two things are chiefely remarkeable; first, how people suffer an alteration in respect of their seuerall Transplantations : Se∣condly, in the mixture of colonies, both which we will shew in these Theoremes. 1 Colonies transplanted from one region into ano∣ther, far remote, retaine a long time their first disposition, though by little and litle they de∣cline and suf er alteration. All mutation requires a certaine distance of time: Sith no motion according to Aristotle is in an instant, neither is it a small time can alter the naturall complexion of men: For as much as the children for the most part deriue their nature from their parents, and euery mans constitution is common∣ly radically grounded, and not easily subiect to externall change: Thus we see the Children of Blackmores being trans∣planted into Europe for diuerse descents to continue black: Yet so as they by little and little declining from their former hue, will in time become white ; as the rest of the European Inha∣bitants: For otherwise it must needs follow, that Scythia should at this day breed many Blackmores, and Ethiopia ma∣ny white ; because no question can bee made, but that all nati∣ons almost of the world since the beginning haue suffered mix∣ture. Wee reade that the Gothes, being a warlike people of the North, long after their first inuasion of Spaine, France, Ita∣ly, and other Territories of Europe, retained their owne dis∣position and nature, altogether disagreeing with the nations, amongst whom they liued: gouerning (as is the manner of Northerne Potentates) rather by Strength then Policy, better able to winne then establish an Empire. But in processe of time it came to passe, that putting off their harsh temper they grew into one nation with the natiue Inhabitants, as in France and Italy, or at least as in Spaine, establishing a gouernment of their owne, by little and little declined from their rudenesse to ciuility, turning their armes to Arts, their strength to stra∣tagemmes, hauing of late yeeres by witty pollicy established a greater empire, then euer their Ancestours could atcheiue by multitudes of men, and strength of armes. And it is worth obseruation, that as these haue suffered a change of Lawes, cu∣stomes, gouernment, which they owe more to the nature of the Climate then to Education ; so in their very language. For the language of the Gothes heretofore, differed little from the language of the ancient Germans, which (as most Northerne languages) was very rough, consisting of many hard and harsh aspirations, with vnpleasant collision of many consonants together: But at this day is changed into a very elegant tongue pleasant to the eare, consisting of many vowels and the softest aspirations. Finally such haue beene the alterations of this people, that being heretofore farre North and branded with all the markes of Northerne rudenesse, they are now estee∣med in the Catalogue of Southerne Inhabitants : Not in regard, as much of place, as nature. The like may wee obserue of the Turkes and Tartars, who spreading their empire from the North towards the South, a long time retained their rude bar∣barous nature, which they haue not at this day altogether cast off; yet so much hath time and place gained vpon their tem∣per, that they are much mollified and farre more tractable to humanity, addicting themselues euery day more and more to the study of artes and ciuility: in so much that (as one ob∣serues) had they not preserued their strict discipline in training vp their youth to armes, they had long since lost much of their large empire, and haue yeelded to the Polonian and Musco∣uite. This change may we find not onely in mankinde, but al∣so in beasts and plants, which being transported into other re∣gions, though a long time retaining their natiue perfection, will notwithstanding in time by little and little degenerate: As I haue heard by relation of some of our Virginian colony in America : who finde a great alteration in our Corne and Cat∣tle, translated thither. This might also bee obserued in the Danes, Saxons, and Angles, comming into Britanny, who part∣ly by the Climate, partly by mixture with them, by little and little deposed their disposition, and became more ciuill. The like may be spoken of the Saxon -colonies sent by Charles the great into Belgia, who since that time becomming more ci ill haue proued lesse warlike, loosing as much by the one, as they ob ained by the other. This point I will no further pros cute, because I hold it sufficiently demonstrated out of that I haue spoken of the variety of naturall dispositions according to the heauenly situation, and the soile. For sith all nations came at first from one originall, we must needs ascribe this mutation to the places which they inhabite. 2 The mixture of Colonies begets in the same nation a greater disparity and variety of the In∣habitants amongst themselues This proposition is by naturall consequence deduced from the former: Because all Colonies transplanted retaining some-what of their former nature, the Mixture must pro∣duce variety. First, because the number of people of any regi∣on by this is supposed to consist of more kindes of dispositions: Secondly, because the promiscuous mixture of these kindes being vnequally tempered, must according to their seuerall combinations produce people, as vnlike one to the other, as to the former. Hence a reason may bee giuen, why the Inhabi∣tants of the extreame regions, either North or South are found to bee amongst themselues as well in temper, as in externall face and habite more like one to the other: whereas the mid∣dle partake of more variety. For the Cimbrians, Danes, and other Scythians, are for the most part of a whitish hue, with flaxen, and yellow haire ; on the other side the Ethiopians for the most part are blacke-haired and curled. The French, Germans, and the English, admit of all variety, hauing some white-haired, some black, some yellow, some tawny, some smooth and some curled-pates. This diuersity the Stoicks would as∣cribe to the phantasie, or image conceiued in the minds of men. Whence they would giue a cause, why beasts commonly bring forth yong, more like one the other then men; because (say they) wanting a reasonable soule they are not stirred vp as men with sundry cogitations, but onely with sense. So the Scit hian and Northerne man being by nature more simple, and affecting those pleasures which are agreeable to nature, and lesse distracted by variety of thoughts, is found to beget children more like their parents then those of the middle cli∣mate. This cause wee should admit probable enough, but for a reason vrged by Bodin and others, that in Aethiopia, where the people of all other is more Acute, and more vio∣lent in lust, they are most like one to the other. For euen all are found to be small of stature, curle-pated, black-skinned, flat-nosed, smooth-skinned, great-lip't, white-toothed, black-eyed: Wherefore this infinite diuersity in the middle region, we cannot well ascribe to any other reason, then the manifold intermixtion and combination of both the extreames. Whence it comes to passe, that by how much more we wander from the middle region, so much the more shall wee finde the people amongst themselues: In so much as Tacitus spake of the Germans, that amongst themselues they were very like in respect of other nations. This mixture in the middle regi∣on out of the extreames, may easily be shewed out of diuerse Colonies, which from the extreames, haue beene translated in∣to the middle region, as the better place of habitation. For hither came the great and extraordinary armies of the Scythi∣ans, Gothes, Turkes and Tartars ; None besides the Vandalls passed into Africke, from whence they were in short time ex∣pulsed. The Arabians and Punicaeans called by the ancient Saracens, leading their Colonies into Europe and Asia, setled themselues in the middle region; None came into Scythia: for when they had inuaded Spaine, Italy and France, they were in France altogether broken, and cut off: After which, Spaine and Italy found a meanes to free themselues from their bondage. Likewise the Colonyes of the Celtes and Romans, endeauoured alwaies to settle themselues in the middle Regi∣ons, and neuer ventured as farre as Scythia Northward, or Southward as farre as Aethiopia: Whence the middle charged with intermixture of both extreames begat a great diuersity. For we find by experience, that out of the mixture of diuerse kinds, diuerse Formes and Natures are ingendred: As of the Mule, Leopard, Crocuta, Lycisca, and Camelopardus ; which being mixt Creatures are vnlike their Sires: So may we iudge of the various mixture of diuerse kinds of men. A Mastiffe or Lycisca, little differs from a Wolfe, because he was conceiued of a Wolfe and a Dogge ; So that a Wolfe is (as Varro noteth) nothing else then a wilde Dogge. But on the other side, a Mule from an Asse and a Horse, As a Camelopardus from a Panthor and a Camell, differ very much; so that if people very neere in Nature be linckt together, they produce an of-spring very like themselues: But if two very vnlike in nature, as an Ethiopian and a Scythian should match together, they must needs bring forth a birth very vnlike to themselues: like a Personated man brought vpon the stage by Ptolomaeus Philedephus, who (as Athenaeus writes) was of two colours, on one side white, on the other blacke. 2 The second point whereby the disposition of people is varied, is Education. Education is the exercise of many people in religions, or morall discipline. Amongst all externall causes of the change of dispositions, there is none greater then Education. For as a good nature is oftentimes corrupted with euill conuersation, so an ill dispo∣sition with good institution hath in some sort been corrected. The chiefe obiects of discipline are Religion and Morality: Whereof we giue the chiefest prerogatiue to Religion, as that which more immediatly bindeth the consciences of men, euen against nature. In the second place Ciuility ; whose end is worldly happinesse. How far each of these preuaile, shall bee shewed in these Theoremes. 1 Education hath great force in the alteration of naturall dispositions: yet so as by accident remitted, they soone returne to their former temper. The force of institution hath been so great, that by some it hath been thought to equall, if not surmount Nature ; whence they haue tearmed it a second nature: For as wee see all sortes of Plantes and Hearbs by good husbandry, to grow better, but left to themselues to grow wilde and barren; So shall wee find it, if not much more, in mankind ▪ which though neuer so Sauage and Barbarous, haue by discipline been corrected and reformed, and though neuer so Polite and ciuill neglecting discipline, haue degenerated, and growne barbarous. For if the externall lineaments of the body may bee by art (as it were) wrought into another mould, much more may wee as∣cribe this to the habits and operations of the mind, being of a more agill nature, and apter to receiue impression. The an∣cients amongst the French (as Bodin testifies) deemed a long visage the most handsome: Whence the Midwiues endeuou∣red to frame most faces to this fashion, as may bee seene in most ancient statues and images. In India (as wee also reade) a great nose and a broad face was most admitted: which caused their Midwiues to effect it as neere as they could in their ten∣der infants. In like manner it hath been the endeauour and am∣bition of most teachers, and informers of youth, to frame the wits of their nouices to such disciplines and perfections, as in the same country found most honor & best acceptance. Hence it came to passe that custome preuailing beyond nature, many nations situate in a ruder climate, wanting that benefit of the Heauens which others plentifully inioye, haue surpassed them in Artes, Sciences, and many other Endowments of the minde. In so triuiall a matter wee will not roue farre for example. It is recorded by the ancients as well of the Germans, as of our owne nation, that they liued almost in the condition of wilde beasts in Woods and Desarts, feeding like swine on hearbs and rootes, without law or discipline: In so much as their Bardes or learned men (as they deemed them) wanting the vse of letters, challenged their chiefect perfection in the composure of certaine rimes of triuiall subiects to please the people. Their houses were caues, their pallaces brackes and thickots, their ta∣bles rockes (as one saith of them) Antra lares, dumeta thoros, caenacula rupes, They were (as Iustine speakes of the infancy of the world) rather carefull to keepe their owne, then ambi∣tious to conquer others; and more studious to preserue life then seeke honour. Their onely law was nature, or some few customes preserued by tradition, not writing: Little dif∣fering from the present Americans, not yet reduced to ci∣vility. But time and discipline preuailing against barbarisme, they are (God be praised) reduced to such a height of civility, that they may (as it were) reade other mens wantes in their owne perfections, and measure other mens losse by their owne gaines. Insomuch as they seeme to haue robbed the Asiaticks of humanitie, the Romans of militarie Discipline, the Hebrewes of Religion, the Grecians of Philosophie, the Aegiptians of Geometry, the Phoenicians of Arithmetick, the Chaldaeans of Astrologie, and almost all the world of curious Workmanship. This their excellency hath bin so fortunate, as to set them in the enuy of other nations, who notwithstanding haue beene faine to borrow of their store. The Italians are censured by Machiauell the Florentine for sending for Germans to measure their land, chalenging to themselues the prerogatiue of wit, aboue other nations. Likewise Pope Leo dispatched his Embassador into Germany for Mathematici∣ans, to rectifie the calender, as sometimes Caesar into Aegipt. This force of discipline how great soeuer being for a time neglected, nature is notwithstanding found to returne to her owne corruption. A prime example of it we haue in the Ro∣mans and Italians, heeretofore for Artes and Military disci∣pline carrying away the palme from the whole world: But now degenerated so much, as it may seeme the image of base∣nesse ; submitting their neckes to the pride of an insulting Pre∣late, farre more abiect then the losse of their libertie vnder Caesar, or the Gothish vsurpation of Alaricus. The like ef∣fect of this neglect of discipline may we find in the Hebrewes, Chaldaeans, Phaenicians, Aegiptians, Graecians, and Indians, who were sometimes admired for learning and Eloquence, and set in the highest top of perfection. Wherefore Aristotle had good reason in his first booke de Coelo to affirme, that Artes and Sciences with all nations had beene subiect to ebbes and flowes, sometimes flourishing in great perfection, and sometimes lan∣guishing and contemned. And to this and no other cause, can we ascribe the present Ignorance and Barbarisme of the Ame∣ricans: Their descent being from Noah and his posterity, they could not at first but haue some forme of discipline, which afterwards being by long processe of time or incertainty of tradition neglected and obliterated, they fell backe into such wayes as their owne depraued nature dictated or the diuell malitiously suggested. 2 By Discipline nations become mo e wise and politicke in the preseruations of states, yet lesse stout and couragious. As Discipline hath been the chiefe cause of the establishment of all states, so hath it on the other side been occasion to soften and weaken the courage of many nations: For it hath beene many times seene, that such people who haue beene com∣mended for wit, haue yeelded to such who are of a ruder dis∣position: as at this day the Greeks and Macedons to the Turkes, the ancient Gaules to the French, the Egyptians to the Persians, the Chaldeans to the Saracens. Hence some giue a reason why the French did inuade and runne ouer Italy without con∣trole vnder Charles the 5; because the Italian Princes at that time were giuen to study and learning ; and it is obserued that the ancient courage of the Turke is much abated, since the time that they grew more ciuill and more strictly imbraced discipline. And this some thinke to haue giuen occasion to Alexander the great, to conquer the Persian Monarchie, the Persians hauing beene before reduced to ciuility, and lost their hardnesse. And we daily see by experience, that no men are more desperate and aduenturous; then those which are rude and barbarous, wanting all good manners and education. None more fearefull and many times more cowardlike then such as are most wise and politick: an example of the former we haue in Aiax, of the other in Vlisses, wherevpon the wi∣sest l aders and commanders haue not been esteemed the most valiant. A certaine English gentleman writing military ob∣seruations affirmes the French nobility to bee more valorous and coragious then the English: Because of the loosenesse of their discipline and the strictnesse of ours. But I will neither grant him the one or the other, neither can I auerre their cou∣rage to be greater, or our discipline stricter. If their valour bee more, it must needs follow their wit is lesse out of this ground. But how soeuer it be, I am sure that Caesar and Tacitus giue the cause of the great stature and courage of the Germans to be their loosenesse and liberty, which howbeit it bee not the sole cause, it must needs bee a great helpe. For wee plainely finde by experience that those countries which be most moun∣tanous where is lesse discipline, are found to produce men for the most part, most warlicke: Such as the Suitzers in Germa∣ny and Biscayn s and Arragonians in Spain . Whence (as some obserue) such countries as are partly Mountanous, partly plaine are seldome at quiet, the one part willingly submitting themselues to gouernment, the other affecting warre and rebellion. Which hath been the cause of the trou∣bles of Naples, and in England before Henry the eight's time betwixt the Welsh and English. Why discipline should in this sort mollifie and weaken the courage of men, many causes may bee giuen. The first and greatest is Religion, then the which, there is no greater curbe to the courage: not meerely of it selfe, but by accident; Because Death being the greatest hazard of a souldier, religion giues a more euident apprehension and sense of the immortality of the soule of man, and sets be∣fore the eye of his vnderstanding, as it were the images of Hell-paines and Caelestiall ioyes, weighing in an aequall scale the danger of the one, and the losse of the other. Whereas ignorant people wanting all sense of religion lightly esteeme of either, holding a temporall death the greatest danger. Whence grew the vsuall Prouerbe amongst profane Ruffi∣ans; that conscience makes cowards. But this (as I said) is meere∣ly accidentall: For as much as nothing spurres on a true reso∣lution more then a good conscience, and a true touch of reli∣gion: witnesse the holy Martyrs of the Church of all ages, whose valour and constancy hath outgone all heathen presi∣dents. But because souldiers for the most part, being a most dissolute kinde of people, hauing either a false religion which can suggest no setled resolution, or an ill conscience grounded vpon no assurance, Religion must needs beget in them a more fearefull disposition. Another cause may bee the seuerity of discipline, which especially in the training vp of youth, is mixed with a kind of slauery: without which our yonger yeers are very vntractable to tast the bitter roots of knowledge. This feare (as it were) stamped in our affections cannot but leaue behind it a continuall impression, which cannot sud∣dainly bee razed out. Such as we find in vs of our masters and teachers, whose friendship we rather imbrace, then familiari∣ty. A third reason, why discipline would weaken and molli∣fie a Nation, may be the delight which men reape in Contem∣platiue studies, and morall or politicke duties, whence followes a neglect of the other. For people of knowledge must needs finde a greater felicity in giftes of the minde, which is vsual∣ly seconded with a contempt of externall and military affaires. The last cause may bee the want of vse and practise of military affaires in most common-wealths; for many states well esta∣blished continue a long time without warres, neither mole∣sting their neighbours, nor dissenting amongst themselues; ex∣cept very seldome, and that by a small army, without troub∣ling the whole state: whence the generall practise be∣ing lesse knowne, becomes more fearefull. Notwithstanding, all this it were brutish to imagine discipline any way vnne∣cessary or hurtfull, either to a Captaine or Statesman. For as much as it more strengthens the wit then abates the courage of a nation. Neither is it properly said to breake and weaken, but rather to temper and regulate our spirits. For it is not valour, but rather rashnesse or fiercenesse, which is not managed with policy and discretion. And although it hath sometimes beene attended with notable exploites, as that of Alexander the great, of the Gothes, the ancient Gaules and many other. Yet shall we obserue such conquests, to bee of small continu∣ance: For what they atcheiued by strength, they lost for want of policy. So that it is well said by one: that moderation is the mother of continuance, to States and Kingdomes. Thus haue we run ouer (by Gods assistance) the chiefe causes of diuersity of dispositions of Nations: Wherein if any man will informe himselfe (as hee should) hee must compare one circumstance with another, and make his iudgement not from a man but a nation; and not censure any Nation out of one obseruation: For practise in Art cannot alwayes come home to speculation. So experience in this kinde will oftentimes crosse the most gene∣rall rules wee can imagine. Tis enough to iudge as wee finde, and walke where the way is open; If any man will desire more curiosity, hee may spend more labour to lesse purpose. Let euery man by beholding the nationall vices of other men, praise Almighty God for his owne happinesse: and by seeing their vertues, learne to correct his owne vices. So should our trauaile in this Terrestriall Globe bee our direct way to Heauen: And that eternall guide should conduct vs which can neuer erre: To whom be ascribed all Glory, Prayse, and Power, for euermore. Deo triuni Laus in aeternum. FINIS.