A Caueat or vvarning for all sortes of men both young and olde to auoid the company of lewd and wicked women to the tune of Virginia. A Caueat or vvarning for all sortes of men both young and olde to auoid the company of lewd and wicked women to the tune of Virginia. A Caueat or VVarning. For all sortes of Men both young and olde, to auoid the Company of lewd and wicked Woemen. To the tune of Virginia. I Once did loue a b nn e Lasse, As Oxford Towne doth know, But now I sée all is not gold, that makes a glistring show. The fairest apple to the eye. May haue a rotten core: And young men all now by my my fall, take héed trust not a whore. Shée'l stroke your chéeks shee'l stroke your chin, Shée'le fling her armes abou' you, And sh'eele protest with vowes and oaths, She cannot liue withou' you: Shee'le sigh and sob if that you say, Youle come to her no more: And Gallants all by this my fall, take heed trust not a whore. Shée'le buy you bandstrings at the Faire, Sheele cause you for to wo her: Shéele make you bracelets of her hayre. for to bewitch you to her, Sheele sit vppon you al the night, Shéele giue you kisses store: But Gallants all by this my fall, take heed, trust not a whore. If thou shouldst be in heauen (quo'h she) I would not liue in hell: If thou shouldst be on earth quoth she, in heauen I would not dwell: If thou shouldst be on sea (quoth she) I would not be on shore: Then Gallants all now by my fall, take héed trust not a whore. If that you chance for to be sad, Sheele bid you send for wine: For that is good swéet heart quoth she, for thy choyce heart and mine: And thus with swee' and smiling words, Shéele diue into your store: But Gallants all now by my fall, take heedd trust not a whore. When she hath had her whole desire, And all your quoyne is spent, If you entreat her company, shéele say she' shal be shente Then will she leaue you to your selfe, Your fortones to deplore: Then Gallants all now by my fall, take heed trust not a whore. The Second Part. To the same tune. Sheele sit alone with you and sweare, By God that did her make, While breath within her body is, shee wil not you forsake: Shée'le let you toy, and stroake and kisse, Shee'le let you doe much more: But youngmen all, now by my fall, take heed trust not a Whore. Now here I lye, my friends doe fly, My wench doth quite forsweare me, Her fathers house is but hard by, and yet she comes not neere me mee: In prison I for her doe lie, Close by her fathers doore: And young men all now by my fall, take heed trust not a whore: My Creditors they chafe at me, For my time spent so bad, And scarse I see no friend I haue, is for my griefe now sad: And those that loud in sormer times, They now doe me abhore: Then youngmen all now by my fall, take héed trust not a whore. My kinsfolkes they doe send to me, And often me doe raile, Now am I plagud in misery, Heere lying in the Iayle: But if that I come out againe, Though I be nere so poore: I neuer more will giue consent, to meddle with a whore. You young men that in London liue, Take heed by this my fall: For if you still will follow whores, they will deuore you all: Your quoine, your states, your health and friends. Then turne you oat of doore: O Youngmen all by this my fall, take heed trust not a whore. Now farewell all you Prentises, That doe in London dwell, Leaue all those vices, which will bring one day your soules to hell: So with my heart prayer for you, I now will say no more: But wish you all both great and small, take heed loue not a whore. FINIS. Imprinted at London for H. G.