Hallelu-jah: or, King David's shrill trumpet, sounding a loude summons to the whole world, to praise God Delivered by way of commentarie and plaine exposition vpon the CXVII. Psalme. By Richard Chapman, minister of the Word of God at Hunmanbie in Yorkshire. Chapman, Richard, d. 1634. Hallelu-jah: or, King David's shrill trumpet, sounding a loude summons to the whole world, to praise God Delivered by way of commentarie and plaine exposition vpon the CXVII. Psalme. By Richard Chapman, minister of the Word of God at Hunmanbie in Yorkshire. Chapman, Richard, d. 1634. Ad Lectorem. SI mihi, (viri Anglicani) in presentia conce∣datis vitam, hac conditione vt ne posthac in sapientiae inquisitione verse ; diligo quidem vos, sed Deo certum est parere potuis quam vobis ac quamdiu vivam & valebo Philosophari atque v∣numquemque vestru exhortari ad virtutem non desistam. SOCRATES oratio quae est apud Platonem in ejus Apologia. HALLELV-IAH, OR, King DAVIDS shrill Trumpet, founding a loude Summons to the whole World to Praise GOD. PSAL. 117. 1. O Praise the Lord all yee Nations, praise him all yee People. T His booke of Psalmes, contayning the Sa∣cred songs in the Scriptures, was pen∣ned by the direction and inspiration of that all-guiding Spi∣rit of Truth, as a briefe Compendi∣um of the holy Hi∣storie, Quid est quod non in Psalmis? as Augustine saith. Matchlesse DAVID in composing of them, sometimes speakes as a King, Psal. 101. 2. I will walke in my house with a perfect heart; noting his Princely and Religious government both of his Kingdome and Family: Propheticall. Sometime as a Pro∣phet, speaking of the Messiah, his Incarnation, Sufferings, Resurrection, Exaltation, &c. him∣selfe the type, Didascalicall. CHRIST the antitype. Some of them further comprehend matter of Inseruction concerning Faith and Manners, as Psal. 1. 15. 37. Other some contayne matter of Prayer and Con∣fession of sinnes, E cticall. as Psal. 25. 51 &c. Some pray∣ers against the Enemies of the Church, as Psal. 79. 83. &c. Historicall. Some Historicall, as Psal. 78. 105. 106, &c. Some comm nding Gods lawes, as Psal. 19. 119. Some describing Gods wonderfull Power, as Psal. 18. Some Thankesgivings for severall de∣liverances, as Psal. Epaineticall. 144. Some are for the stirring up of men to praise God for his Mercies, as here; Wherein the Prophet summons all Gods people comprised in these great Seedes of Iaphet and Sem, to praise God, to acknowledge the Scepter and Kingdome of CHRIST IESVS the true Messiah; Not onely his generall regiment, in which even the Devils are his vassals to exercise unregenerate Men and Women in theyr lusts, till hee bring them to destruction, from the poysonous sopori∣ferous cup of sinne, to the scalding cup of Gods eternall Wrath: but obediently to submit them∣selves to that mighty Scepter by which in parti∣cular hee guides and governes his Church: And so this Epaineticall, or Praise-giving Psalme, brancheth it selfe into two parts: First, a Proposition or generall exhortation, verse, 1. O praise the Lord all yee Nations, praise him all yee People. Secondly, a dou∣ble reason, 1. In regard of his Mercy in making Promises. 2. His Truth in the perfor∣ming of them, verse, 2. To leave this for a while, come wee to the first, which is the Exhortation: In which consider; 1. The Duty enjoyned in the Exhortation, [Praise] which is urged by the interjecti∣on [O] which is not supernumerall, but necessary: 2. The Object [the Lord] 3. The parties enjoyned, 1. [Nations,] 2. [Peo∣ple,] which are taken of some generally for all the people of God: but others and the more generall current of Interpreters, doe by these note the two great Seedes; The Gentiles, which are accounted before theyr calling, Lo-ruhamah, Hos. 1. 6. Not beloved, Lo-ammi. and vers. 9. Not my People; but heere Prophetically called to praise God: And the Iewes which by a certaine speciall prerogative, are called Gods people, his darlings, and deare∣ly Beloved ones, which hee carried upon his winges as an Eagle her young ones, and led them in the Wildernesse like a flocke of Sheepe, which had his speciall protection and favour, the kisses of his mouth, Hee gave his Lawes unto Iacob, his Statutes and Ordinances to Israel, Hee hath not dealt so with any Nation, Psal. 147. 19. As it were confining his Graces within the skirts and straite borders of Palestina, at Salem is his Taber∣nacle. Psal. 76. 2. The duty is called here Hallelu-jah, Duty. which is doubled in this Verse, and repeated in the next; To shew how necessary the sacrifice of Praise and Thankesgiving is; and also, how backward wee are in the performance thereof, that must so often be called upon. Now to gather all these into an handfull as a well composed Posie, plea∣sant to the smell; [O] Consider that this which stands in the porch of this Psalme, is not super∣fluous, but notes the fervent ardency, which is required in this Duty, which must be perfor∣med not superficially, orally, but zealously, heartily; which must or ought to be the salt and season of all our Duties and Devotions: Nullum omni∣potenti Deo ta∣le est sacrifici∣um, quale est zelus animorū. Our prayers and our praises must not freeze betwixt our teeth, but (even with Eliah) must be trans∣ported to Heaven in a fierie Chariot, winged with the heate of our zeale; Gregor. in E∣zech Hom 12. and there is no Sa∣crifice so incomparably pleasing to Almighty God. Next, [Praise] the thing enjoyned, is to [Praise] which is nothing else (as Aristotle sayth) but to eluci∣dare, Lib. 1. & 3. Rhet. make manifest and knowne (as it were a cunning Herald) the greatnesse of vertue; as to praise Alexander for his Liberality, Iulius Caesar for his Patience, &c. To praise Mercy, Power, Iustice, Wisedome, what is it, but to magni∣fie those eminent backe-parts and attributes of I HOVA the mighty GOD, in and by which hee hath revealed himselfe unto his Creatures, Men, and Angels? Exod. 34. 6, And so this leades us to the true object of our Duty. [The Lord,] [The Lord] as hee is called God in respect of his goodnesse, so is hee Lord in regard of his Majesticke greatnesse. Dominus Deus noster Papa. This title is given to a great man upon earth, Dij titulares, non tutelares. and more, is Sycophanti∣cally given to the Pope, to be called, besides Lord, a God; which are but onely so in title. How great then is hee, Quantus est Dominus qui Dominos fecit? which makes and un∣makes these Lords at his pleasure? There be many Gods and many Lords, August. 1 Cor. 8. 5. but this is he which controls and commands them all. Others by Authority of usurpation, Psal. 82. 1. But he is judge among the Gods, able to do more by his absolute power, than he will by his actuall, able in potent not impotent workes: He is called Omnipotent, Dicitur omni∣potens faciendo quod vult, non patiendo quod non vult. Au∣gust de Civit. saith Augustine, in doing what he pleaseth, not in suffering what he pleas∣eth not; Which makes him, and none but him, the true object of our praise and service; not the World, Flesh, or Devill, but the Lord; not the Saints in heaven, Dei. lib. 5. cap. 10. Iob. 5. 1. To which of the Saints wilt thou turne? not to Baal-zebub the God of Ekron, nor Belz bub the Prince of Devils, but with David, Psal. 73. 28. It is good for mee to drawe neare unto the Lord. Our prayers and praises, confidence and hope, doe here levell at him, as the surest marke. Make him the begin∣ning and end, . the first and last of all thy labours and endeavours, A love princi∣pium, &c. saith Gregory Nazianzen; the very Heathen could both acknowledge and prac¦tise this. So then this stands as one of the Priests upon a turret of the Temple, or as a monitor to tell us what praise belongs not to our selves. Prov. 27. 2. Let another man praise thee, and not thine owne mouth, a stranger, and not thine owne lips; This is Pharisee-like, Luke 18. Because he had slow neighbours, he becomes his owne trumpet, and sounds an Alarum to his owne fol∣lie: this is but a cold praise, Friget laus quam sibi quis∣que assumit, nulla necessita. te coactus. Pi∣neda super Iob, cap. 29. ver. 12. n. 5. to blow the coales with thine owne breath. This fault was some∣times in the Church of C inth, 1 Cor. 4. 7. which the Apostle reproveth, Who maketh thee to dif∣fer from another? and what hast thou that thou hast not received? (gifts of mind, as learning, wisedome; gifts of body, strength, agility, beau∣tie) if thou hast received them, why boastest thou as if thou hadst not received them? P ter Martyr. Which is a Metaphor taken from swolne vessels, super locum. which have in them nothing but ayre: Or from some member in the body sweld with rotten putri∣faction, and corrupt humors; Know then, that every good and perfect gift comes downe from the Father of lights, Iam. 1. 17. This is the ground∣worke of all Christian modesty. Hast thou Faith? It is from thy calling: hast thou Remissi∣on of sinnes, and Iustification? It is from Christ: The gift of Prayer, Prophecy, Preaching, or of the Tongues? it is from the Spirit: all which or whatsoever else thou hast, Marlorat. sup. locum. doe offer thee occasi∣ons of humility and modesty, more than of pride or haughtines, because thou hast received them. Yet consider this, that a man may speake in his owne praise, in the case of necessity, when a mans person or cause is calumniated; or whereby the glory of God may be advanced, to the credit of his calling, and the profit of the Church; as Paul the most modest of the Apostles, as appeareth, 1 Cor. 15. 9, I am the least of the Apostles, which am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I persecu∣ted the Church of God; ashamed, and yet not a∣shamed to confesse, 1 Tim. 1. 15. A blasphemer, a persecuter, and iniurious, the chiefe of all sin∣ners. As B. Iewell defended his learning a∣gainst the ray∣ling Papists. Yet when the credit of his calling came into question, and the wonderous worke of God in him seemed to bee disparaged by false Apo∣stles, he was then a chiefe Apostle, one that spake more languages than they all, Ʋide Plutarch. in Comentario, Qua ratione quis citra invi∣diam laudare seipsum potest. had more revelations, and was more extraordinarily cal∣led, and if any one may boast, this holy elect vessell of salvation, the learned Doctor of the Gentiles may boast, and will praise himselfe, and so may you. Neyther must wee hunt after others, to praise us: where there is good Wine, there needs no Ivie-bush, and where there is true worth, there needs no flatterer. It is but a poore reputation, that is pinned upon another mans Tongue, and hangs upon the sound of his clapper: This man must bee left as a prey for his Parmeno, and carry with him the badge of Pride, Qui laudare se appetit, super∣bus esse con∣vincitur. Super Psal. 5. as Augustine sayth; Hee that desires to bee praised, needes no other witnesse of his ambitious heart, and the apparent danger of a swelling Impostume. Neyther must wee settle our admiration and praise upon any particular Person or Sect, to pinne our salvation onely upon them, as if they were the onely Oracles of GOD, to account of them as the people voyced of Herod, Act. 12. 22. The voyce of God and not of Man. And thus to despise others, as not sufficiently guifted for their calling and embassage: what is this, but to have mens persons in admiration? The Apostle accounts such to be but Carnall, 1. Corinth. 3. 3. For yee are yet Carnall, there being among you envying, strife, and divisions, are yee not car∣nall, and walke as men? While one sayth, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollos, are yee not carnall? For what is Paul, or Apollos, but the Mi∣nisters by whom yee beleeve? Peter Martyr. Nihil aliud mo∣litur Apostolus, nisi quòd personarum ratio non ha∣beatur in Ecclesia: In this, the Apostle aymes at nothing else, Aquinas, super locum. but that there should be no Proso∣polepsie, or acception of persons in the Church. Hee reproves their judgement in this, because they gave to their Ministers more than was re∣quisite and expedient; as if the Spirit of God were too sparing in some, and too lavish and prodigail in others. Obiect. Object. But it may be objected, Valentinian the godly Emperor, would be Baptised by none but Ambrose. Answ. Answ. The reason is apparant, not to be re∣spect of persons which caused him to travaile for Baptisme to Ambrose: but because the Bi∣shops of that time were generally possessed with Arianisme, and scarce one so sound as Ambrose was, the cause why he repaired thither. But where Idolatry is banished, Heresy demolished, the Ministery of the Word and Sacraments esta∣blished, and sincerely delivered and administred, Christ himselfe being the head and President o∣ver his Church, giving gifts unto all that he sends, though to some more, to some lesse, yet to all sufficient for their Calling, Ephes. 4. 11: We must not, we ought not, (if we will escape the brand and marke of c rnall men) have mens persons in admiration, in setting one so farre be∣fore another, to make them more than Christ himselfe ever made them, which is, to be instru∣ments for the gathering of his Church. It was his owne admonition, Mat. 23. 8. Be ye not called R bi, for one is your Master, which is Christ: and he must be heard if he come in stammering Moses, as well as in eloquent Paul, or courtly Esay, in the weakest and poorest of them, Mat. 3. 17. and Math. 17. 5. This is my beloved Sonne, in whom I am well pleased, heare him. Neither must we idolatrously magnifie the creature, to shrinke in, and pinche, and pinne up too streight, the large glory of the Creator. The wise man, Wisd. 14. 15. laying downe the ground-worke of all Idolatry, and spirituall fornication, saith thus; A Father afflicted with untimely mourning, when he had made an Image of his child soone taken away, now honoured him as a God, which was then a dead man, and delive∣red to those that were under him, ceremonies and Sacrifices. Thus we see, out of the heat of a too ardent and earnest love, transported in a prepo∣sterous current, that is soone taken from the Creator, and given to the creature; and where that true-loving affection of man is placed, there is way made for Idolatry, if not rightly and strongly guided by the Spirit of Grace and thus we may offend even in things that are most deare, most neare unto us, in our wives, children, selfe love &c. as 1 Sam. 2. 29. Eli honoured his children more than God. Ambition in the dis∣obedience of our first Parents, in a selfe love to themselves, is made the way to that fearefull A∣postacy; hence covetous men are called Idola∣ters, Eph. 5. 5. Col. 3. 5. Mammon is the Idoll, and the worldling the Priest that sacrificeth to their imprisoned god, as the Gyants Aloydae did to their captived Mars: And upon this he be∣stowes a double worship; an inward, for hee loves, desires, delights, and trusts in his wealth: and an outward, for he spends most of his time upon his Idoll, in gathering carefully, keeping watchfully, encreasing painefully, and honou∣ring dutifully his carved and painted God; and yet the dust of earthly profits hath put out both his eyes, that hee sees not his horrible Idolatry. The like wee see, Wisd. 13. 1. &c. The madnesse of man! first to ascribe the praise due to the Creator, to stockes and stones, creatures insensible; Secondly to men, which are but dust and ashes, vers. 18. for health he cal∣leth to that which is weake: Thirdly to wicked men, the worst of reasonable creatures; and then even to Devils the enemies of God and man, they gave that incommunicable name of God; Thus by little and little, the Devill brought on the highest pitch of Idolatry, making the wayes of men and their Religion as uncertaine, as Hanni∣ball's crooked passages upon the Alpes; That fooles make a mocke at sinne, Pro. 14. 9. and they erre in their hearts, not knowing the wayes of God, Psal. 95. 10. Thus when we will set our hearts upon these sublunary and terrestriall va∣nities, it is iust with God, Supplicij cau∣sa est supplici∣umque sui. to make our ignorance both our sinne, and our punishment, that the ig∣norant Idolater may complaine with the wick∣ed, Wisd. 5. 6. Therefore have we erred from the way of truth, and the light of righteousnesse hath not shined upon us, and the Sunne of righteousnesse rose not upon us; we wearied our selves in the way of wick∣ednesse and destruction, yea we have walked through deserts, where there lay no way, but for the way of the Lord, we have not knowne it. Neither must we, with these bezling Bacchana∣lians of Belshazzar (swallowing his last draught in the sacred bolles, which his father had sacri∣legiously taken from the Temple) drinke wine, and praise the Gods of gold, Silver, Iron, brasse wood, Dan. 5. 4. neglecting to praise and glorifie the God, in whose hand our breath is, and whose are all our wayes; sacri∣ficing to our cuppes and our cannes, our nets and our navigations. Thus as though we had made an atonement with death, and an agreement with hell, Esay 28. 15. Though we be poysoned with the drowsie venome of the Aspe, securely snorting in the fooles Paradise, and enchaunted castle of this ebrietie, swimming in the charmed cupps of Calypso, and the dangerous drugges of Circes, we are for all this, in no more saftety than man sleeping in the midst of the Sea, or upon the top of the tottering maste of a shippe, Pro. 23 34. and though it have the face of beauty, yet in the end it bites like a Serpent, armed in the taile with the sting of a Cockatrice; How Odys. and though wee misse the heavy doome of Elpenor who in this madnesse was sent to the grave, if not to the hor∣rible pit with a broken necke: Yet let every in∣temperate Hellu , and grape-devouring panther (the auncient Hierogly phicke of this vice) know that without his speedy amendment, his belly is his God, and he glories in his shame, & a fearefull destruction waites his cursed end, Phil. 3. 18. For he is a lover of pleasure more than of God, 2 Tim. 3. 4. Neither must wee place in this our Hallelu-jah an admiration of any superstition, be it as auncient as the Embryons world, in its nonage, like those Ephesians, Acts 19. 28. for their she god Diana; erring in the knowledge of the true God, which is a spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and trueth, Io. 4 24. or like those famosed Idolaters, Ier. 44. 17. Wee will burne incense to the Queene of heaven, and powre out drinke offerings vnto her, as wee have done and our Fathers, our Kings and Prin∣ces have done in the Cities of Iudah, and in the Streetes of Ierusalem; for then had we plenty of all things, wee were then well, and sawe no e∣vill. See wee not this foolish generation to conti∣nue? Vide Moresi∣num de origine & incremento Papatus. praising the superstitious times of heathen∣derived Popery, even wholly sprung out of su∣perstitious Gentilisme, as hath bin proved; their outward showes, and their antique fashions in crossing, creeping, washing, elevating their new∣made god, &c. that we might wonder at them, as sometime M. Cato did, Cic. lib. 2. de Divinat. to see their charmers, because one of them laughed not to see another in their antique and apish Idolatries, which are more fit to please babes, than any way to satis∣fie the conscience of man: all in the shadowe, nothing in the substance. If these then, or any such have forestalled the market of our affecti∣ons, and have taken a lodging in our hearts, let us deale with them as Iacob did with his false Gods, or as Ephraim with his Idols, cast them out: And let the current of our affections run in the right streame, and be fixed on the right obiect, Praise ye the Lord. Whence and from what hath bin spoken, and the naturall genuine sence of the words them∣selves, let us erect for our supportance in this du∣ty, the doctrine following, viz. It is a chiefe duty necessarily enioyned to all creatures and especially to man, Doct. 1. to become in∣struments of the glorious praise of their omni∣potent Creator. This was the gracious practise of old Zacharie, Luke 1. 68. for receiving his gracefull sonne Iohn, supposed to be the Messiah, Ioh. 1. 21. a blessing from God no sooner gi∣ven but a blessing from man returned, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, &c. rightly called in the language of Canaan, a blessing; ingratitude being the devils text, wicked men the Glossers and Expositors, both which must end in a cursed de∣struction. Blessed Marie in her song cals it a mag∣nifying, Luke 1. 46. My soule doth magnifie the Lord. Deus Optimus Maximus. To magnifie, is to make great: Now God is the best, the greatest, and cannot in himselfe be made lesser or greater by us; all that we can doe, either in the magnifying or vilifying of him, is in regard of others, when we sweare falsely, pro∣test rashly, blaspheame like an Atheist or Turke; we do to our power, Magnificare nihil aliud est quam magnum facere. Lexicon Theologicum. lessen his greatnes, when we unthankefully returne not his due praise for his mercies, we vilipend & debase as much as we can his gracious goodnes, and when we magnifie him, wee make him great, wee proclaime him good. To make this more plaine, and to drive this du∣tie deeper into our soules; it is in regard of vs, the end of our election, foreseene in the mercy and love of God before the foundation of the World, as over-looking our estate in Adam, as changeably good, to that in Christ, immutably glorious, Ephes 1. 6 To the praise of his glorious Grace. It is the end of our creation, even enjoy∣ned to insensible animals, the visible and legible booke of our instruction and lessoning in this du∣ty, the sunne, Psal. 150. last verse. moone, day, night, Psal. 19. 1. and every thing that hath breath are summoned by Davids Trumpet, to become the well uned Cymball of their Creators praise. But Man, the rare Epitome of all these, hath an instrument of speech, to tune it to a higher key, Rev. 4. 11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive honour and praise, for thou hast created all things for thy wils sake, and for thy pleasures sake were they created. It is the end of our redemption, Rev. 5. 9. Thou art worthy to take the booke and open the seales thereof, for thou wast slaine, and hast redeemed us to God by thy bloud. And thus I must instance in the rest, even to the low∣est particular deliverance, from the hellish; and the highest, to the least and lowest danger, as Exod. 15. Iudg. 5. &c. no sooner a deliverance, but a song of thanks giving to the deliverer: And it is the summe of what thy God for this requires of thee, Psal. 50. 15. Call upon me in the time of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shalt praise mee. Reas. Reas. 1. 1. Because as all rivers come from the sea, and returne thither againe, returning as it were a thankefull tribute to their Lord: Even so all things come from the Father of lights, Iam. 1 17. which are for our good, as from the foun∣taine of goodnesse, and must, or at least ought in thankefulnesse to returne to him againe: All the gifts of fortune, falsely so called, as riches and possessions; the gracefull endowments of the body, as agility, beauty, strength; all the goods of the minde, as wit, learning: No silver in Ben∣jamins sacke, till Ioseph put it in; and no good in man except God bestowe it: Even that noble skill in physicke, standing upon two legs, Rea∣son and Experience, Galenus. is an excellent meanes to preserve our health; and yet for all this, it is the great Doctor, which hath Heaven for his chaire, that keepeth us alive; for so soone as he is angry, wee are gone, wee bring our yeares to an end, as a tale that is told, Psal. 90. 9. If the keepers of our house doe not tremble, Eccles. 12. 1. 2. 3. &c. and the grinders cease not, and the golden ewer be not broken, and our eyes the windowes of our bodies, be not darke, it is from the Father of lights. Hence renowned Salomon, and all the learned Clearkes have their wisedome; and the same it was, which tooke away that great knowledge from the learned Trapezuntius, Ʋolateran: lib. 21. Comment. Funcius et Bu∣cholcerus in Chronic. lib. 7. who was not one∣ly infatuated in his learning, cap. 13. but forgot his owne name: Hence are all students counselled by Sa∣risburiensis in Policratico, to knocke at heaven gate to God for their good speede, that the key of knowledge may open a doore of utterance. So there are diversities of gifts, diversities of admi∣nistrations, and diversities of operations, but all from the same Spirit, & from the same Lord, who worketh all in all, 1 Cor. 12. Among the Apo∣stles, Paul was good at planting, Apollos at wate∣ring. Among the Fathers, some construed the Scriptures all egorically, as Origen who excelled others either in effect or defect; Ʋbi benè, nemo melius, ubi ma∣lè, nemo pejus. Augustine dog∣matically; Hierome more literally; Gregory the great Morrally; Sixtus Senen: hibl lib. 3. pag. 1 7. and Chrysostome pathetically. And also among our moderne writers, Erasmus was full of matter and words, In Celloquio de Erasmo. Luther had store of matter without many words, Carolostadius nei∣ther &c. as Luther himselfe wrote upon the wals of his Chamber: So also among our ordinary Preachers, some have good utterance, but a bad conceite; some an excellent utterance, but a meane wit; some both, some neither. As for the gifts appertaining to the will, 2 Cor. 3. 5. All our sufficiencie is of God. For faith, which (as some thinke) belongeth both to the will and un∣derstanding, it is also the gift of God, 10. 6. 29. This is the gift of God, that ye beleeve on him, whom he hath sent. God worketh in man, the first de∣sire to beleeve, De spiritu & litera, cap. 34. ipsumvelle credere, saith Augustine; The staying of the bloudy fluxe of thy corrupti∣on comes from some vertue in Christ, Mar. 5. 30 The purging of thy lippes from lying, swearing, blaspheaming &c. is by a coale from the Altar, Esay 6. 6. The gift of Prayer powerfully sollici∣ting the throne of mercy, Quisquis tibi enuxerat vera merita sua, quid tibi enu∣merita nisi mu∣nera tua? Au∣gust. Conf. lib. 9. cap. 13. and filling heaven and earth with Abba father, proceedes from none but the Spirit which makes intercession for us with groanes, which cannot be expressed, Rom. 8. 26. The tongue of the learned, it is from the Lord, Esay, Bonamea, dona tua. 50. 4. If thou hadst the zeale, love, constan∣cy, knowledge of those noble Patriarches, Aug. Confes. and those constant Martyrs, lib. 10. cap. 4. in the Primitive times, every drop of whose bloud bred and sprung up a new Saint; if thou wert glorious as an Angell, thy meat as Manna, thy garments as Aarons E∣phod, thy breath as sweete, as the perfume of the Tabernacle, from the life of Nature, to the life of Grace, and so to the life of Glory, all is from this Fountaine which is God. Nay, even that thou art not wicked, as the most debauched creature in the world, it is from the supporting and restrayning grace of God, upon whom thou leanest, in the wildernesse of this world, as the Spouse upon her beloved, Cant. 8. Or as Moses hands were supported by Aaron and Hur, Exod. 17. 12. Or as the Altar of the Sanctuarie at the base thereof had Lyons for supporters; so thou, the Lyon of the Tribe of Iudah; else how is it in man to direct his wayes aright without this? Cephas in the Syriack tongue a Stone. Though Peter, à Pe∣tra, a Rocke, surnamed Cephas, for his stedfast∣nesse, yet fell into a fearefull Apostacie: Godly David, moulded in the mint of Regeneration, in∣to Adultery and Murther; these, and much more hadst thou committed, if God had not prevented. Marshall then all thy guifts and gra∣ces together, let them face one another, as the Cherubins upon the Mercy-seate, and all looke upon God; For of him, and through him, and for him are all things, Rom. 11. 36. Because it is a great part of Gods worship, Reas. 2. and even the most of that service, which he re∣quires at the hands of silly Men, David in his Quaere makes it the summe of all, Psal. 116. 12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits towards me? Poculum Eu∣charistiae. but onely this, I will take the cuppe of thanksgiving, Gratiarum ac∣tio, est actus la∣ ig. quinas. and call upon the name of the Lord. For this purpose it is called a sacrifice of praise, Heb. 13. 15. The calves of our lippes, and the first fruite of faith, Acts 2. 46. It is his honour, and that hee will not give to another; Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth &c. Esay 42. 10. To teach us, Vse. 1. not onely to condemne in our∣practise, that ingratitude, which is a monster in nature: As we call the gratefull man, a kind man; so the ingratefull an unnaturall, an absurd soloe∣cisme in manners, consisting of two foule vices, falshood in not acknowledging, iniustice in not requiting a benefit. Alexander the Great, and Iu∣lius Caesar, both renowned, the one for liberali∣ty, the other for patience; the one would not give, nor the other forgive an ingratefull person. Not onely this; but forasmuch as every one ar∣rogates a due performance of this duty, Aug Euthim ∣us super Psal. ult. To teach us how to tread right in the steps of his service; And to this purpose consider, that God is praised 1. vocally, as sing to the Lord, 2. Chordally, praise him upon the Harpe, 3. Pneumatically, with Trum∣pets, Shawmes, Cimbals, &c. when our breath is the bellowes, Clemens Alex∣andrinus. 4. Allegorically, in our actions, contem∣plations, words, works, life, death, being not only temples, 1 Cor. 3. 16. but also timbrels of the Holy Ghost. Know then that thy right praising & mag∣nifying of God is thy obedience to his voyce, his law, Noli gloriari quod lingua be∣nè dicis, si vita malè dicis. Su∣per Psal. 133. his Gospell, &c. Never boast, saith Au∣gustine, that thou blessest with thy mouth, when thou cursest with thy life and conversation: It is not only thy breath, but thy breast, thy song, but thy soule; thy voyce, but thy life, that must be this Davidicall trump of praise & thanksgiving. 1 Pet. 2. 12. Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, and by this meanes they which are yet without, and strangers from God, shall have occasi∣on to glorifie God in the day of their visitation. Math. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good workes, and glorifie your Fa∣ther which is in heaven. Our praise is our obedi∣ence; and our obedience is nothing else, Damascen lib. 3. cap. 4. but a subiecting of our will to God. So that it is with every disobedient person (though he can mar∣shall his words, & adorne his phrase, that they be like apples of gold with pictures of Silver, Prov. 25, 11.) as with a secretly disloyall traytor, who in the chamber of Presence is highly extolling and commending the King, the State, & Govern∣ment; but being without the Court gate, is o∣pening his poysonous jawes, and casting whole Seas of contumelious reproches, and outragious slanders against the same; who will take this for a true subject? and who will account a wicked man the servant of God, though with his tongue he praise God, when he speaks nothing but con∣tradiction in his life and conversation? This false and pseudo-christianity makes the Gospell and sincere professors thereof, and even God him∣selfe to be traduced; and as Iacob was accounted with the Sichemites; Ye have troubled me (speak∣ing to his cruell sonnes) to make me stincke a∣mong the inhabitants of the land, Gen. 34. 30. For this cause, Rom. 2. 24. The name of God is blas∣phemed among the Gentiles, through you, professing to knowe God, but in workes denying him, being ab∣hominable, disobedient, and to euery good worke re∣probate, Tit. 1: 16. And hence wee see plainely the reason and ground-worke of those foule aspersions, daily slanders, and Ismaelitish songes of Turkes, Iewes, Infidels, and Papists, which are daily cast as dirt into the face of Christianity, to be onely our dis∣solute lives, disobedient carriages, and disorde∣red conversation, Salvianus de guhernatione Dei, lib. 4. Christiani hoc ipso deteriores, quo meliores esse deberent, Christians are so much the worse, as they ought to be better; Either then be as thou seemest, or seeme as thou art, else thou art but like the little bird with the great voyce, which the Fowler onely hearing, and thinking her to be some great fowle, took paines to take her; and seeing her little body ill able to countervaile his paines, Tues vox & nihil praeterea. he said, Thou art a voice, an Eccho, an empty outward sound, and nothing else. Know then that all thine orall profession, superficiall adoration, and Pharisaicall sepul∣cher-like guilded outside, is in Gods account without the inward subjection of the heart to his holy lawes, no better than to cut off a dogges necke, to offer swines flesh or to blesse an Idoll, Esay 66. 3. so long as thy heart is unsanctified, wanting the salt of Grace, 2 Kings 2. and remaining un∣wholesome as the poysonous waters of Bethel, Christ reiecteth thy lip-praises, and outward ser∣vice as the sacrifice of fooles. Psal. 50. 16. Vnto the wicked saith God, Why doest thou preach my lawes, and takest my covenant into thy mouth? wher∣as thou hatest to be reformed, and hast cast my wordes behinde thee. Christ will not suffer the Devill, the father of lies, to beare witnesse of his truth, Mar. 1. 24. and Paul will not suffer the Pytho∣nesse to proclaime the truth, O tempora, O mores! Acts, 16. 18. O then the rottennesse of our times! how is our obedi∣ence (if we have any) cut short, and wee are be∣come like that speech of Phavorinus, A. Gellius Nost. Attic. who seing a mother communicating her motherly duty to the nurse of her child, cryed out, Quodnam est hoc imperfectum & dividiatum matrum genus? What a company of halfe-faced, and halfe-faith∣ed imperfect Christian Herods, Agrippas, Naa∣mans, whose obedience and religion is pinned upon their profits, pleasures? like those Liber∣tines, Mal. 3. 14. What profit is it, that wee have walked humbly before him? These be but left∣handed Ehuds, or as children which say theyr prayers to have their breakefasts; or as the Si∣chemites, which took upon them the Seale of the Covenant for gaine, Gen. 34. Or as those that fol∣lowed Christ, more for the loaves, than for the love, Io. 6. That come to Church, as most do to a Funerall, more to fill their bellies, than to lament the dead, or to comfort the widdow, or the Or∣phans. But remember Christian, that God requirs the whole man, to fulfill his whole law, and that the whole time of his life, Totum homi∣nem, totam le∣gem, totum tempus. Totus, tota, totum, are required; but further God requires, Phil 2. 10. That at the name of Iesus every knee should bowe, of things in Heaven and things in earth, and things under the earth, and every mouth must confesse him. And yet I see a ranke of worse Locusts issuing as it were out of the pitte, even openly by their o∣pen prophanenesse, and horrible blasphemies, proclaiming themselves to be men of stubborne knees, stiffe necks, and uncircumcised hearts, o∣penly with Bebemoth, Leviathan, or Satan him∣selfe, or at least with those Gyant-like sonnes of the earth proclaiming rebellion and disobedi∣ence against the most High: These shame at no∣thing but vertue, and blush at nothing but hone∣stie: Of whom it may be said, as Mecaenas spake of the sawcie fellow, that would not bowe to Caesar, Hic homo cru∣bescit timere Caesarem. This man is ashamed to feare or reverence Caesar: so these men are ashamed to feare God, and blush at nothing, but against their wils to weare the livery of Christianity; Surely these men goe downe to the Chambers of death, if not to the pit of destruction. Let us then prove God to be our Father by our obedience, and our Master by our feare, Mal. 1. 6. Let it not be in word onely, but in deed, as Iohn spake of Love, 1 Iohn 3. 18. or as Socrates when the people ad∣miringly praised his oration, Lauda ut vide∣am. sayd, Praise it, that I may see it. Obedience is better than all our sacri∣fice, 1 Sam. 15. 22. preferred by God himselfe, Hos. 6. 6. whereas rebellion is as the sinne of witch∣craft. Obey my voyce, and I will be your God, and yee shall be my people, this is a favour of rest unto God, therefore, Let every one that nameth the Lord, depart from iniquity, 2 Tim, 2. 19. We praise God, Ʋse 2. when we acknowledge his Kingdome, power, and glory, and ascribe them unto him as his due. This our Saviour CHRIST teacheth, Math. 6. 13. after he had taught us how to pray for things inward, outward, spiri∣tuall, temporall, all things needfully requisite for soule and body; in the conclusion he teacheth us to give thankes, and that in the acknowledge∣ing his Kingdome, power, and glory. Now forasmuch as the infinite and ineffable essence of God, cannot be fully comprehended of the weake vessell of mortality, Man; he be∣ing eternall, and which inhabiteth eternity, Esay 57. 15. the Ancient of dayes, King of ages, 1 Tim. 1. 17. he made the times the word eternall in He∣bers language being taken from a root; which sig∣nifieth to lye hid, teaching us, that our knowledge is not able to finde out the hidden being of the Almighty, being but weake, and in part, 1 Cor. 13. 12. onely seeing as it were, a glimpse of one sud∣dainely passing by, the more full knowledge of him is reserued till wee be made like him, and see him as he is, Deus est cir∣culus. 1 Iohn 3. 2. even face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. To desire any full knowledge of his inscrutable essence, Cic. de natura Deorum. is to lose our selves in a maze, or labyrinth, and with Simonides to adde unto one dayes labour in the search therof, three dayes more, and be further off then when wee began; Socrat. lib. 6. Tripart. Eust. and with the Child, wee may assoone bring the whole Ocean into a little pit, as with the old man paint the Trinitie on a table: cap. 21. And therefore when Evagnius had heard a long dispu∣tation of the Trinity, he wisely concluded, that it was without the compasse of any logicall de∣finition. So because our weake vessell cannot saile with safety over this innavigable Ocean, he hath revealed himselfe by his back-parts, Exod. 34. 6, His Power, mercy, Longanimity, Iustice, &c. Rom. 1. 20. The invisible things of him from the creation of the World, are clearely seene, being understood by the things that are made; even his e∣ternall power, and Godhead; and so by acknow∣ledging these, by humbling our selves under his mighty hand, 1 Pet. 5. 6. and by fearing him, that cannot onely kill the body, but also cast the soule into hell fire, Math. 10. 28: We praise his power, ac∣knowledging what he can doe, the whole armie of his creatures, N Olans de Attila. and hell being at his command: The strongest tyrant in the world (as Attila con∣fessed of himselfe) is but his scourge, which when he hath used to the sufficient chastising of his Church, he will cast into the fire, as the Father doth the rod, which he used in whipping his child. Pilatus sibiip∣si intulit ma∣nus Niceph. Looke upon Pharaoh, Herod, Pilate, Heliodorus, which are spectacles of Gods power, sometimes their owne hands their owne executi∣oners; lib. 2. cap. 10. even Tophet is their portion, & cap. 13. de morte Herodis: suiipsius inter∣emptor divina ultione factus. Esay 30. He is a consuming fire, Hebr. 12. last verse, to burne up his enemies: and as weake stubble is not able to withstand that furious element; Euseh lib. 2. ca. 7. Eccl hist. no more can a weake man the omnipotent Creator. Take heed then how thou offendest him, Iosephus lib. 28 Act. cap. 5. but acknowledge him in his wisdome, Eutropius lib. 7. power, &c. and seeke him while he may be found. Then heare this all yee abusers of the glory of God, Glorie, put for all that may be known of God as Exod. 33. 18 Rom. 23. Which change the glory of the un∣corruptible God into an image of corruptible man and to birds, and foure footed beasts, and creeping things, contemners of him in his Kingdome, power, and glory; that say with those drunken Atheists, Esay 28 15. The overflowing scourge shall passe through, and not come nigh us, for we have made lies our refuge. Ye that put farre away the e∣vill day, and suffer the seate of violence to enter, Amos 6. 3. that say, The vision is yet for many dayes to come, and he prophecieth of times a farre off, Ezec. 12. 27. That hearest the thunder claps of judge∣ment against thy bribery, usury, oppression, &c. and yet with the deafe adder stoppest thine eares charme the charmer never so wisely; what is this, Aelian. varia Historia Lib. 4. but even to mocke God in his power, and glory, and to say with Pherecides, We are as safe, that offer no sacrifice, as they that offer whole Hecatombes? What is this but to play with Gods sacred booke, and his truth therein, as Da∣phias with the Diabolicall Delphicke Oracle? who enquiring, where he might finde his lost horse, Inventurum se quidem, sed ut eo turbatus per∣ierat, Cic. de Fato. when he had none; the Oracle answered, he should finde one indeed, but his death with it: Homeward he comes joyfully, that he had delu∣ded the Oracle, but by the way was comman∣ded by King Attalus to be throwne downe a rocke called a Horse. Though this be fabulous, yet the morall will surely fall heavy upon all the despisers of God in his power and glory, and the enemies of his kingdome, even to crush them to destruction in the furnace of Gods implacable wrath. Consider this ye that forget God, Psal. 50. 22. We must learne hence to praise God in his creatures, Ʋse. 3. in acknowledging his uncontroleable soveraignty and Lordship over them, that he is onely that which the flattering Parasites would have given to Canutus one of the Kings of Eng∣land, English Chro∣nicle. who stiled him Ruler and Lord of Sea and Land; Polyd Ʋirgil. lib. 7. Anglicae Historiae. which he modestly confuted, when go∣ing to the sea side, and sitting in his chaire of State, he would but could not commaund the waves of the watery regiment, no more than Pharaoh could the red Sea. Esay 44. 24. I am Iehova that made all things, therefore his by right of Creation, and thence requires his honour and praise in the moderate vse of them: He is the Land-lord, thou the tenant, and that at will; he may put thee out of thy earthen tabernacle when hee will, though thou be a free-holder, yet (as the lawyer speakes) not without impeachment of Waste; a lease thou hast indeed with a large scope, but yet with this proviso, Iohn 6. 12. Let nothing be lost. The Almighty as the head of this great house, the World, as he hath created all things and given them their being, Luk. 16. 1. ; sic Scorpius à vastando vio∣las. Arist. Plin. Dioscor. so he will surely take a strickt account of their waste, Luke 16. 2. How doe I heare this of thee? give an account of thy stewardship: He is arraigned for a matter of waste in the first verse; which word there used, seemes to be taken from the Scorpion, which wilfully wasteth the sweete smelling Violets. How hast thou encreased thy talents, and not bezeled and imbezled them away, to the disho∣nour of thine and their Creator? The creatures abused to the dishonour of their Chiefe-Lord e∣ven groane under thee; the Sunne blushes to be made a God, 2 King. 23. 5. The high places are ashamed of theyr idolatrous Chamarims burning incense there; the Fire of the Persian, the Croco∣dile of the Aegyptian, the Gold and Silver of the Iewe, which made Baal thereof: Onely the shame∣lesse Devill is not ashamed of his worshippers in Calecute, &c: If we considered this, and Gods Lordship over them, we would not be thus im∣pudently bold in the abuse of them. And first in this matter let us arraigne the proud man: To what end is this waste? to lay lands and livings up∣on his backe, to make it glister. God indeed hath not onely allowed garments for necessity; Gen. 3 21. a leatherne coate for Adam; but also orna∣ments for comlines, Esther 6. 11. royall roabs for Mordecai: They that are in Kings houses weare and are allowed to weare soft rayment. But those antique fashions both God and nature, and the lawes of all Countries have alwayes con∣demned as irreligious and wicked, those being marred in the making, Propter venu∣statem inve∣nustae. Chry∣sost. Ornamen∣tum est quod ornat, ornat quod honestio∣rem facit. as one spake of fantastique women, spoyling and defacing those genuine graces, and naturall beauty, which nature from a liberall hand hath bestowed upon them. That doth beautifie, which doth beatifie, making our graces more gracious, and our soules more hap∣py. The ridiculous chaine of pride, Psal. 73. 6, and the foolish fashions of the Iewes, Esay 3. 16. that now puffes up thy soule like a tympany, making thy body bright, as Herods drawing the eyes of admiration after it; will one day without repentance accuse thee for a waster to the great God and Lord of the Creatures. Next comes to the barre, as guilty of Waste, De grege por∣corum. Horat. the fat bellyed swolne guts, the Epicure, a dis∣honourer of the Creator in the abuse of the crea∣ture, meate and drinke. Hebraicè. Agur, Prov. 30. 8. prayes for foode convenient, or the food of allowance: But must feed of all dishes, Ierome. and knowes no mean but surfeit, Apicius had 1000. Cookes. makes his morsell his god, in mea pa∣tria Deus venter, his belly, his Bell, his idoll, like Aesops hen, too fat to lay, to produce any fruits of goodnesse; Dives -like faring deliciously e∣very day: Sence his purveyor, Appetite his Steward, his throate his heaven, like sensuall Philoxenus, that wished his throate like a Cranes, more fully to delight his bestiall part. Salo∣mon, Prov. 23. 25. joynes a twinne of the same wombe, The drunkard, and the glutton shall come unto poverty; He likewise dishonours God in his creatures, Esay 5. 22. There is a woe hangs over him, like Damocles sword at his delicates, tyed by a slender haire, while he carowses his con∣demnation, and feares not: Dr. Boys. Non dispensat, sed dissipat bo∣na Domini. Either of these are a morbus hydropicus, a Baltazzars sinne, while he doth not wisely dispense as a steward, but blindely scatter as a waster of his Masters∣goods, and so must passe as a prodigall unthrift. Againe, we dishonour God in his creatures, when they are made instruments against the god∣ly, whom the whole hoast of Heaven and earth desire to serve and comfort, from the highest Angell to the poorest worme. Heb. 1. 14. Are they not all ministring spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes, which shall be heires of salvation. Psal. Angele Dei, qui custos es mei, &c. 91. 11. He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keepe thee in all thy wayes. Math. 4. 11. Christ in the heate of his temptation, hath Angels to comfort him. Math. 18. 10. The elect, even the little ones have Angels: Distressed Hagar is com∣forted by an heavenly messenger, Gen. 16. 7. Ia∣cob by a vision of celestiall spirits, Gen. 32. 2. Thus were the Israelites conducted, Exod. 14. 19 What need I speake of Ioshua, Ios. 5. 13. Gideon, Elija, &c. nay even Sunne and Moone, Iudg. 6. 11. with every starre in the glorious firmament, 1 Kings 19. all fight for the Church. Iud. Miitat ther Lucan. 5. 2. They fought in their order from hea∣ven, even the starres in their courses, the river Kishon, stood not idle, but swept them away as a besome doth the filth in the house: The sea gives way to the passage of Gods people, and heapeth together his fluctuant fluide moysture, to make them a dryed pavement, Exod. 14. 22. Ios. 10. 12, had experience of this from the helpe of heaven in their defence against the Amorites; so that sea, land, heaven, and the whole hoast of the creatures would doe service to the Godly. Hence the creature groanes to be made an in∣strument of torture by a Tyrant, to whom he is appoynted a minister of comfort by his maker, as the fire to burne, the water to drowne Gods servants, abused to this end by the earth, or ra∣ther hell-sprung Gyants of the world. And as the creature groanes to be an engine to hurt the god∣ly, so is it weary of those that dishonour him, an enemie to Gods enemies, Atheists, Idolaters, Swearers, &c. the Sunne would cloud, and obnubilate his glorious face, the Moone her light, the Cressets of heaven their twinckling lustre, from the rebellious, idolatrous, disobedient sin∣ner, that hath so long viewed and enioyed their excellent comfort continually cast from those chrystall eyes of heaven, and is not lessoned by them to praise his God; Vesta, a vistan∣do. the Vestall-earth mourns under the burthen of a rebellious Nation, every furrow thereof cries against the depopulating Incloser, Weepe against him. Hebraicè. Iob 31. 38. The stones and timber where the wicked man dwelleth, Hab. 2. 11. All he pos∣sesseth is his enemie, because he is an enemie to God; witnesse these tenne Plagues powred up∣pon Egypt both from heaven and earth, Tota creatura est armatura Dei. all the creatures are Gods armie to fight against them that fight against him. So then, if thou be a blas∣phemer, Persecuter, &c. wert thou in a City, whose walls were as strong turretted, and inex∣pugnable, as the wall that Phocas built about his Pallace, Civitatis ever∣sio est morum non muror m casus. yet shall it be really performed on thee, as it was voyced to him in the night, Did they teach the heavens, they may be scaled, the sinne in the soule spoyles all: Graviores ini∣mici sunt mo∣res pravi quam hostes infesti. A cities overthrow is sooner wrought by wicked lives, than weake wals, saith Augustine; they worst enemies are thy finnes, saith Ambrose; so the hoast of creatures are thine enemies, while thou hast no peace with God; peace and wickednesse cannot dwell to∣gether: Mars vltor ga∣leam perdidit, & res non po∣tuit servare suas. The heathen gods indeed, could not re∣venge their owne quarrels, as the Poet speakes of Mars; but our God hath heaven, earth, and hell to fight his battels, a thousand wayes to re∣venge, mille nocendi artes. Wicked man! why dost thou continue in thy sinnes, and say with stupid phara , Who is the Lord? When thou canst not breathe, moove, or live without him. Learne then like the Bee to gather honie from every flower, In caula de au∣la, in hara de a∣ra loquitur. to give praise from every creature; all objects to a meditating Salomon are wings to mount his thoughts to heaven; as the old Romanes seeing the blewe stones, were put in minde of Olympus; so from every creature to elevate our thoughts to Sion, and so we may honour God in honouring him in his creatures. Whether yee eate or drink, Do all to the glory of God, in all things giue thankes, 1 Thes. 5. 18. Every creature is good, and ought not to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, Ingratum si dixeris omnia dixeris Plaut. 1 Tim. 4. 4. Be not then an unthank∣full Esau, to sit downe, eate, drinke, enjoy the creatures, Ingratitudo ob∣string it manus Dei. Marlorat. and irreverently rise up, and goe thy way. Gratitude opens, ingratitude pens up and closes the wine cellars, the heavens; the buck∣ets and cisternes of the skie are ready to showre vpon the thankfull. Praise the Lord, makes the heavens as Nilus Egypt, fertile. Lastly, to drive this Hallelu-jah deeper into thy Soule, consider that thou not only hast the crea∣ture from God, but also he must give it power to comfort, nourish, and sustaine thee. There is indeed bread that nourisheth not, Esay 55. 2. Why doe yee spend mony for that which is not bread, and labour for that which satisfieth not; it seemes, but is not bread, and if it bee, it satisfies not; Such is that bread of secrecies, and waters of stealth, Prov. Pabula pecca∣ti, pocula lethi. 9. 17. The delicates and cates that sinne sets before us, deadly cuppes, and Acheronticke po∣tions, Z uxes painted grapes to feede the devils black birdes to meager leannesse: But God gives the creature power and strength; Exod. 23. 25. It is not thy meate, drinke, sleepe, cloathes, that of themselves doe nourish and warme thee more than the hard and cold stone, but Gods blessing upon them, Math. 4:4. Man lives not by bread onely, but by the word and blessing of God; Else might thou starve in the midst of thy plenty: Dan. 1. 15. see Psalm. 104. 13. 14. 15. The poore man with Daniel may be as well liking with pulse and pure water, as they that eate of the portion of the Kings meate; may goe as warme in his ragges, as they in Kings houses, that are cloathed in soft rai∣ment, if God blesse his bread and water, Exod. 23 25. Thus when God threatens a famine and dearth, he takes not away the bread it selfe, but the staffe, viz. the strength & nutritive power of it, Levit. 26. 26. When I shall breake the staffe of your bread, Hag. 1. 6. Ezech. 4. 16. & 5. 16 I will breake the staffe of bread, called Esay 3. 1. the stay of bread and the stay of water. It is but a poore elemen∣tall creature, to which Gods blessing hath not added strength, if God did not heare the heavens for vertue, the heavens, the earth for influence, and the corne & the wine for vegetative power, Hos. 2. 21. All simples were but simple things, and all componds idle, when they want the best ingredient, Gods blessing. Goutish Asa wants this powerfull ingredient in his physicke, when 2 Chron. 16. 12. He sought not the Lord in his dis∣ease, but to Physitians; He was not so lame in his feete, as in his faith. Wee must not sticke so fast in the secrets of Philosophy, but also looke upon the mysteries of Divinity; God is the chiefe Physitian, let Plato hold the candle to Mo∣ses, and Physitians learne from the sonnes of the Prophets. In all thy labours and endeavours, Psal. 127. 2 it is in vaine for thee to rise up earely, to sit up late, to eate the bread of sorrowes; For except the Lord give a blessing to our workes, it is but to plowe the sand, and to lodge at the Labour in vaine. 1 Cor. 3. 6. Paul plants, Apollos waters, but God gives the increase; So the vintage of workes depends upon the showres of Gods blessing. Parturiunt montes, Hor. The workes of the world may have likely and proud entrances, but yet halt in the conclusion, if not attended from a superior in∣fluence: But God from a slender beginning brings a plentifull issue, Carpo-balsa∣mum. Isidor. as in that Balme immor∣tall, incorruptible seed of the Word, Inest in viva voce nescio quid latentis energiae. lerom. which in it selfe is dead, by Gods Spirit assisting, concurres to the begetting of a new man, powerfully mor∣tifying the rotten flesh, and quickning the spirit. That little mustard-seede, which spreads up in∣to branches, able to give the fowles of heaven harbour, able thus armed to binde the strong man, disarme him and cast him out of his usur∣ped possession of thy soule, 2 Cor. 10. 5. Casting downe the highest things, that exalt themselves a∣gainst the knowledge of God, and captivating every thought to the obedience of Christ: Ier. 23. 29. A hammer to breake the stone, not in the reynes, but in the heart. Simile. As a tree hath manifest to the eye, leaves, flowers, and fruite, but the root lyes hid: And as in man, the body is seene, but the better and purer part is vailed under the curtaine of his flesh. And as in all things we see the Accidents, not the forme and substance: So the Word we heare, but the life of it is the power of God. So then if thou seest a blessing upon thy labours, wicked men called, and that come to passe, prophecyed by Esay 11. 6. Ravenous Wolves, Cruell Leo∣pards, &c. swearers, lyers, drunkards, forsaking their wicked, loathed, slavish drudgery to the world, flesh, and divell; and submit their sinewy neckes, uncircumcised hearts, and prophane lives in obedience to the scepter of Christ, and out of a syncere profession, and unfaigned confession, Post mortem Iuliani Aposta∣ ae. Euse . cry with the Souldiers under Iovini∣an, We are Christians, and will be true to the colours of the Crosse, according to our Sacramentall Oath under the banner of our Michaël, we will wage warre with the red Dragon, and all the spirituall enemies of our salvation. God by his Word hath perswaded us, 2 Cor. 5 . 21. called, and called us out of our inchanted fooles Para∣dise, wherein we lay in the prison and dungeon of spirituall darkensse, into his marvailous light, hath opened our eyes, freed our feete, and as a bird we are escaped out of the cordes and manacles of our hellish sinnes; Pro 5. 22. 2 Tim. 3. 26 And whereas we lived to our owne corruptions, emancipated to our lusts, even the devill the Prince of the ayre, Eph. Gal. 2. 20. 2. 3. tutoring our disobedience; now wee live to God, Esay 32. 15. the life of God, the life of Grace; our scorching lusts, and rebellious natures (which heavenly influence should have wasted) the scal∣ding cup of Gods wrath, are washed & cleansed in the bloud of the immaculate lambe, made ours in our justification, Acts 4. 10. and sealed to us in the laver of our new baptizing renovation. It lyes not in mans power to beget faith in his owne soule. He that is the ministerial instrument of this wondrous work, which causeth admiration and ioy in men and Angels, Luke 15. 7. Though his tongue were the pen of a ready writer, Psal. 45. 2. and spake as the Oracle of God, had the mouth of golden Chry∣sostome, the gravity of Tertullian, the spirit of hea∣venly Augustine, could make Felix tremble with Paul, conjure the cursed workes of darkenesse; Yet if he sacrificed to his owne nets and yarne, Hab. 1. 16. he robbes God of his praise and glorie. It is not thy word nor thy eloquence, or learning, but Gods power that brings these mighty things to passe, Menecrates called himselfe in pride before King Philip, Rex salut is; E∣go Rex Medi∣cinae, tu Mace∣doniae. and so all other things. If the mercy of God be not in our sustenance, we may dye with meate in our mouthes, as did the Israelites: if his provi∣dentiall goodnesse restraine her influence, and withold her vertue, were our garments as rich as Aarons Ephod, there were no heate or benefit in them: Nature declines her ordinary working, when Gods revocation hath chidden it. Though thou labourest and sweatest with diligence till the taper of thy life were burnt out, if the Lord prosper not thy handy worke, thou makest but roapes of sand to bind Sampson. Then sing with the Psalmist, Psal. 115. 1. Not unto vs O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glorie. The principall end of Gods actions, must be the end of ours, and his is his praise, Prove. 16. 4. The Lord made all things for himselfe, viz for his owne praise, even the wicked for the day of evill; Even out of the un∣hallowed heape of sinne, will he mould the sil∣ver trumpet of his owne praise. To teach us, Vse. 4. That God is praised, magnified, and made great by us, when his Image is repai∣red in us, Gen. 1. 26. Let vs make Man after our owne Image: Ambr. & Ori∣gen super. Lu∣cam. Now this image, which is his righ∣teousnesse and holinesse, the new man, Ephes 4. 24. newly comming out of the mint of Regene∣ration (as furnace-smoaked Israel out of Egypt) is a glorifying of God, and this, (as a curious worke graces the artificer) magnifies the maker. Man, the little Epitome or Compendium of the world, hath bin admired for his wonderfull structure, Herm. Trisme∣gistu . and frame, called by that almost mira∣cle of Antiquity, a great Miracle. Nothing more admirable than Man. Man, a certaine di∣vine thing, Memento quòd homo sit quoddam Omne, what shines not in him? Our Saviour CHRIST honours him with a large tytle, Mark. 16. 15. Goe Preach the Gospell to every creature; Quasi homo es∣set illa omnis creatura creatio Rom. 1. Gal. 6. and who but Man must have the benefit of this Gos∣pell. But, if wee looke upon him as the image of God repaired, a new creature; nay a new crea∣tion, 2. Cor. 5. 17: As Ioseph comming from Pri∣son; as Mordecai, Que potest e∣gere me & te Bern. whom the King of honour will honour; as Queene Hester perfumed with the aromaticall graces of the Spirit, having the royall robe of Christs righteousnesse; Cant. 4. 7. Thou art all faire my Love, and there is no spot in thee, comely as the Curtaines, and pompe of Salomon, having cast off the blacke scorchings of Kedar, Cant. 1. 5. and the Gibeonitish ragges of sinne; now remember old things no more, Esay 7. he is now a glorious creature, and here is God magnified; the greater measure of grace affords a grea∣ter measure of praise. Strive then, beloved, to have thy unhallowed soule sanctified, thy life reformed, thy crooked pathes of vanity straigh∣ted, every thought brought into subiection, that God may be made greater in thee, and thou the trumpet of his praise. And the further to stirre us up to holinesse, consider that the magnifying of God is the mag∣nifying of our selves. Luke 1. 46. Mary sings, My soule doth magnifie the Lord, and verse 49. He that is mighty hath magnified me: He that blesseth the Lord, Qui benedicit deo, augetur; qui maledicit, minuitur. is encreased; he that blaspheameth, de∣creased. Our exultation is the first staire of our exaltation: Wouldest thou be exalted, made great, and honoured of God, of men and Angels? then season thy soule with grace, honor God, For they that Honour him, he will honour, and they that despise him, A in Rome. shall be dispised, 1 Sam 2. 30. He that goes to the Court of Honour must passe by the temple of vertue, from the Pallace of Grace to the Place of Glory. Learne then to have the praise of God in thy mouth: Let Hallelu-jah be the Cadence in all our Musicke, and our Mu∣sicke in all our actions, that being our practice on earth, we may one day be Angelicall Choristers in Heaven. Psal. 103. Praise the Lord, O my soule, and all that is within me praise his holy name; Aug. lib. 1. de D. Chianna cap. 31. for Omne bo∣num nostrum velipse vel ab ipso, All our good is either God, or from God. Parties; Gentile, Iewe, enjoyned to this duty. 1. The Gentile, the stocke of Iapheth, one of the sonnes of Noah, Sem first na∣med in regard of his preroga∣tive; as Izaac before Ismael, and Iacob be∣fore Esau. Gen. 9. Gen. 9. 18. the eldest by birth, but reckoned by way of Anticipation in the last place: And though a long time they stoode, as it were, excommunicate, and cut off from the Co∣venant of grace, yet in Gods appoynted time, this rejected seede is perswaded to dwell in the tents of their brother Sem the Iewe, Psal. 18. 49. 2 Sam. 22. 50. as Noah prophecy∣ed: And the neuer erring Spirit makes this place a propheticall prediction of Gods never failing purpose of their calling, D ut. 32. 43. Rom. 15. 11. with many other scriptures pregnant to prove it; Esay 11. 10. the word [Nations] in the old testament in Hebers tongue, . being rendred by Paul (Gentiles) a most fit pro∣phecy for this purpose, Appositissimum vaticinium ad comprobandam Gentium voca∣tionem. Marlo∣rat. sayth Marlorat and o∣thers upon the place. Thus though a great while the forlorne Prodigall sate in darkenesse, and in the shadowe of death, and God vouchsafed his loves and favours to the Iewes, At Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling in Sion, and gives this land a peculiar appropriation to him∣selfe, Psal. Pars pro toto per Synecdo∣chen. 108. 8. Gilead is mine, Manasses is mine, being as the signet upon his right hand; yet the Flouds of his favour is shoured downe at last plentifully upon the heads of his long neglected Nation, and now he decks them as Isaac his love∣ly Rebecca, and marryes them to himselfe in righteousnesse, judgement, mercy, compassion, and faithfulnesse, Hos. 2. 19. hence this Doc∣trine. God hath according to his word revealed Christ Iesus to be a Saviour to the Gentiles, Doct. cal∣led them out of the night of their superstitious blindnes, into the liberty of the sonnes of light, and hath made them Choristers in the quire of his Saints, and partakers of his grace unto salva∣tion. This was shadowed, prophecied, and testified long before. Shadowed in the calling of Abra∣ham out of his owne country, Gen. 12. 1. into Ca∣naan, where the Canaanite the Maldonat ex Chrysost. in lo∣cum. worst of the Gen∣tiles dwelt. Ex vocatione Abrahae praefi∣gurata est vo∣catio Gentium & Iudaeorum, quia pater est fidelium. Cyril. This doth notably prefigure the cal∣ling both of Iewe and Gentile, because he is called the Father of the Faithfull. Also in the Candle∣sticke, Exod. 25. 31, which is commaunded to be made of one entire piece, but having sixe branches, to signifie the multitude of the Chur∣ches of Iewes and Gentiles, whose Originall is from the same shanke called a little sister, Cant. 8. 8. We have a little sister, Hall super Cant. and she hath no breasts, viz. small as yet through the rarenesse of her Con∣verts, and destitute of the helpe of any outward Ministery, whereby she might either beare or nourish children unto God; she hath no paps, that is, knowledge in the Doctrine of Salvation; contained in the dugges of the two Testaments, Iacobus de Va∣lentia super Cant. whereby she can as a mother suckle her new-borne babes, being but newly come out of the wildernesse of damnable superstition, & the cu∣riosity of Philosophy, Acts 19. 19. as the students in Ephesus. Gods two Testaments, in which onely is e∣ternall life, as testifying of Christ, which is the truth, the way, and the life, Ioh. 14. 6. are called the Tower of David, built for defence, a thou∣sand shields hang therein, furnished with rich Armorie, which affoords infinite wayes of pro∣tection, and monuments of victory, Cant. 4. 4. and These are twins, verse 5. like those of Hippo∣crates, or those Socia's in Plautus, one so like the other in resemblances, that as our Saviour Christ said of the knowledge of his Father, If ye have knowne me, ye have knowne my Father: And these the Gentiles Church knew not as yet, which af∣ter was supplyed in the time of Constantine, Idem ibidem. and after by those famous Luminaries of the world, Chrysostome, Portae Eccle∣siae dicuntur in quantum iutro∣ducunt bonos in Ecclesiam. Ibid. Hieron. in Ho∣seam. Eusebius, Augustine, &c. called there∣fore the gates of the Church, having the keyes of knowledge to let in the Godly. Shadowed also, Hos. 1. 2. Goe take unto thee a wife of fornica∣tions: Where it is observed, that Hoseas signify∣ing a Saviour, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 37. intimates that Christ tooke unto himselfe for his spouse, the polluted Church of the Gentiles, Aug. contra Faustum lib. 22. cap 89. a wife of fornications in worship∣ping Idols and Devils in stead of the living God, pertus lib. 14. Com. in Io∣han. that He might make it unto himselfe a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle. Eph 5. 27. or any such thing, Math. 8. 10. but to make it holy, and without blame; and so The not beleeving wife is sanctified by the beleeving husband, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Shadowed also in Ruth the Moabitesse, gleaning in the field of Boaz the Iewe, and their providentiall marri∣ ge, the poore ruthfull Gentile, with the rich Iewe, Ruth. 2. 3. and 4. 13: And shadowed also in Peter nd Iohn, running to the sepulcher; Iohn the Iewes, they came first to Christ; Peter the Gentiles, over∣taking them, though not the sooner, yet the sounder. Bifeild super Col. 2. 1. It was also shadowed in Christs buriall in Ierusalem, where the dying sacrifices had gi∣ven warning of his death, but it was without the city, to answere the type, Levit. 16. 25, of the Scape goate sent into the wildernesse, and to sig∣nifie his sufferings belonged to Gentiles as well as to Iewes: Tertull. contra Marci. lib. 5 In his birth, borne in the night, to signifie that he should lighten the Gentiles, that sate in the darkenesse of superstition and igno∣rance, Acts 10. 23. And thus was it shadowed in Peters vessell, Act. 17. 11. descending like a Sheet, in which the Doctor of the Iewes is taught to call the long rejected Gentiles, called by the free mer∣cy of God, cleane: Shadowed also in Iacob, who served for Rachel and Leah, Gen. 30. 31. And in the land of Egypt, Gen. 41: And likewise in the marriage of Sampson, Moses, Gideons fleece, and Davids building in Araunahs floore. It was also fore-prophecyed, Fore-propheci∣ed. Gen. 9. 27. God shall enlarge Iapheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Sem, which signifieth, not the enlarging onely of his borders and dominions, and his surpri∣sing, enchroaching, and being in league with Sem; for this was also in cursed Cham the Aegyptian, and others of that spewed-out seede, were in league with the Iewe, and sometime enlarged their boarders upon them; Blandè redu∣cat. Ʋatablus. but gently to per∣swade them home to theyr Fathers house, Luke. 15. to become a chosen people, partakers of the meanes of salvation, Rupertus super Genesim. and heyres of life. The Greekes and Latines by these two languages did o∣pen the tents of Sem, that is, the Hebrew Scrip∣tures layd up in Hebers sacred tongue, and made them knowne to the Gentiles, and so they were received into the Covenant: The Church a long time stood pailed, and imparked, as a garden en∣closed, or a spring shut up, Cant. 4. 12. Or as Israel in the land of Goshen, within the skirts of honoured Palestina, but now Christ hath broken downe the partition wall, Eph. 2. 14. and hath made all one; there is neither Iewe nor Gentile, the two wals of Nations; bond nor free, the two wals of Conditions; male or female, the two walls of sexe; the great two quicke and dead, and the greatest two heaven and earth: but all are one in Christ Iesus, Gal. 3. 28. all these so many com∣binations; all meete in him as in a Center, he in the midst of all drawes all, and knitts up all in one faith, one blessed hope of his comming, he is a Corner-stone, or coyne to joyne these two walls together, , Zac. 10. 4. Out of him came forth the corner, Luke 16. 26 Zach. 3. 9. Esay 28. 16. &c. and so that great gulfe that made a particion against us the Gentiles, is taken away, and all made one. Esay 52. 10. All the ends of the earth shall see the sal∣vation of our God: And againe, this Evangelicall Prophet, or propheticall Evangelist, Cap. 11. 10. In that day there shall be a roote of Iesse, which shall stand for an ensigne of the people, to it shall the Gen∣tiles seeke: and Cap. ult. 19. They shall declare my glory among the Gentiles: So though theyr eyes were as yet dimme as Elie's, 1 Sam. 4. 15. and they could not see the light of saving truth, yet there should come out of Iesse, a light to lighten the Gentiles, Luke 2. 32. being set in the sight of all upon the Candlesticke of the Crosse, the Gospell preached in an open field, and he borne in a com∣mon Inne, Luke 2. 7. The desire of all nations shall come, Hag. 2. 7. From the rising of the Sunne unto the going downe thereof, my name is great among the Gentiles, Mal. 1. 11. If yee be Christs, yee are A∣brahams seede, and heires according to the promise: For though Abrahams person be but one, Abraham gig∣nens, Abraham credens. yet his conditions are diverse, as he is a begetting Abra∣ham; so the Gentiles are not his children accor∣ding to the flesh; as he is a beleeving Abraham, so we are his children according to the faith, and according to promise: Esay 9. 2. The people which walked in darkenesse have seene a great light; they that dwelled in the land of the shadowe of death, up∣on them hath the light shined: And thus in a mat∣ter so copious, I referre you to the fountaine of divine prophecies, the rich Cabinet (much more worth than the Cabinet of Darius, so curiously kept by Alexander) the booke of God. Thirdly, Testified in time. it was manifestly testified in time, whose appointed revolution being finished, these forlorne, forsaken Nations were gathered, with as much love and tendernesse, as the hen gather∣eth her chickens under her wings, fedde as kind∣ly at the breasts of him, whose paps are girt about with a golden girdle, Rev. 1. 13. as the young ones at the breasts of the more than naturall Pellican; And though in the time of Salomon they had no breasts, and of Esay, they sate in darknesse, and of Hosea they made Lo-ammi not my people, Lorucha mai not beloved, few in number, scarce one among a thousand, as yet they did not cry unto God, Ier. 3. 4. My Father thou art the guide of my youth; They were scarce one of a citie, two of a family, verse 14. the Apostles with a large mandate & commissi∣on must goe teach all nations, Math. 28. 19. then was the wilde Olive engrafted in and made par∣taker of the fatnesse of the Olive, Rom. 11. 17. the branches were plucked off, as the signet of ones finger, and she grafted in; the Iewes decreased, and neare in a falling sicknesse and consumption; the Gentiles encreased & multiplyed, and came forth of their darknesse, as the twin kling Cressets of heaven at the setting of the Worlds great Lumi¦narie, the Sunne, like to that, Ezech 16. 17 I have caused thee to multiply as the budde of the field, and thou hast encreased and waxen great, and thou hast gotten excellent ornaments, thy breasts are fashioned, thine haire growne, wheras thou wast naked, and bare, but a fewe Proselites; But after the ascention of our Saviour Christ, the very seed and first bud begun to flourish, take roote and growe like a Cedar in Lebanon. Now consider in this, Conversion is twofold. that conversion or cal∣ling is twofold: First, it signifieth repentance of them which have fallen away from the truth of religion to heresie, from vertue to sinne &c. and afterward returne againe to God: Ioel 2. 11. Ther∣fore now saith the Lord, turne unto me againe, and such was Salomons conversion: Secondly it sig∣nifies Regeneration, when a man is effectually called, and converted to the faith, which before stood in the way to perdition: such, Eph. 2. 1. And you hath he quickned, which were dead in sinnes and trespasses, wherein in time past ye walked; Tit. 3. 3. For we our selves were sometime foolish disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envie &c. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of you, but ye are sanctified, but yee are justifyed, &c. Such is the conversion of the Gentiles, Paul & Bar∣nabas being sent by the Church through Pha nicia & Samaria, theyr Countries, to make them Chri∣stians, Acts 15. 3. The good successe which God gave to theyr planting and waterings may easily appeare, when the burning Lampe of the Gospell like a flaming fire went over the whole earth by a divine disposing thereof: Vide Niceph. It light upon Canda∣ces Aehiopian Noble: Eccles Hist. lib. cap. 6. Acts 8. by the Ministery of Philip, Hic primo ex gentibus a Phi∣lippo per appa∣ritionem verbi divini sacra consceutus est. which was made the first fruites of the beleeving Gentiles, making good the Oracle of the Prophet, Psal. 68. 31. Ethiopia shall soone stretch forth her hands unto God, this Noble man being the first Preacher of these glad ydings to the Moores. Euseb. lib. This is also manifest in the woman of Chanaan, 1. Eccl. hist. or a Syrophoenician, Math. 15, her discreet, humble, fervent and constant prayer to Christ, which goes away with that great commendati∣on, O woman great is thy faith; as at the faith of the Centurion, Maldonat. super Math. cap. 15. Math. 8. 10. I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel; Where we see Christ never wondering at the faith of any Iewe, but of the Gentiles; because in old time They were stran∣gers from the covenant of Promise, without hope, without God in the world, Ephes. 2. 12. And so this is the Lords doing, and it is marvailous in our eyes, that we the dogs of the Gentiles should be∣come Gods people, to magnifie his mercy in our conversion; she is called no more Dog, but Woman, no more an Infidell but a beleever; and now like a Spaniell, she will not away from her Masters heeles, till she get (though not a whole loafe, yet) crummes from his table. Testified also in the Easterne Magi, Math. 2. 9. which brought offerings to the new incarnate Sauiour; Arte Mathe∣matica vim, et discursum no∣verant Plane∣tarum, & Ele∣mentorum na∣turam, Cypri∣an. whether they were Astrologers, which by art Mathema∣ticall knew the power and motion of the Plan∣nets, and nature of the Elements; or whether they were Magically learned, and professors of those divelish mysticall Arts, as Iustin: contra Triphon: Origen lib. 1. contr Celsum; Or they were Kings according to that of David, Psal. 72. 14. Psal. 68. 29. Chrysost in Math. Tertul. lib. 3. contra Iud s. Kings shall bring presents unto thee, as of Thar∣sis, and the Iles of Arabia and Saba, the Queene whereof presented Salomon Christs type, odori∣ferous perfumes, Theophylact. in 2 cap. Math. &c. 1 King. 12. which are fore∣told of these wise men; Or whether they came from Persia, as Cyril lib. 2. in Esa 2. 49. Basil. Hom. 25. de Nativitate Christi, Theophylact, which calls them Persian Kings, Invencus Poeta; which is pro∣bable from the scituation of the Kingdome, the names of the wise men, their manner of adorati∣on, their gifts &c. or from Chaldaea, as Hieron. su∣per Esa. cap. 19. Chalcidicus in Platonis Timaeo, cals them the perfectly wise men of the Chaldes, Chaldaeorum perfectè sapien∣tes viri. Anselmus in 2. Math. Ioachimus Abbas saith, This day hath he (speaking of Christ) revealed himselfe to the Chaldaeans by the leading of a new star, Hodiè revela∣vit se Chaldaeis novi syder is in∣dicio. and this also is confirmed by many reasons: Or from Arabia Faelix, Sabaei Arabum propter thura clarissimi. Pli∣nius lib. 12. cap. 14. they shall bring gold and incense from Saba, Esay 60. 6. which is the Metropolis or mother-city in Arabia the happy, Cyprian ser de stella & Magis, Epiphanius, Hilar. lib. 4 de Trinit. Tacitus lib. 5 hist. and these were the first converted of the Gentiles; Diod. Siculus. Or from Mesopotamia, or Aegypt; all with one consentand one voyce, make theyr comming a plaine testification of their calling, which afterward increased as the sand of the Sea, the daughter of Aegypt forgot her fathers house, and the prophane barren Gentile bore children unto God. The wise men come here among the Iewes as Apostles, Sus Minervam. and teachers of their Rabbinicall Doctors, Olitor Eremit Thaulerum, A∣sina Balaam do∣cet. that so long had held the chaire of Moses, blind fat-bellyes, that could not see so farre as the auncient Sybils, or those strangers, that so oft had tossed over those divine Oracles of this starre of Iacob, and the mighty volumes of their Master Moses; Dij laborantes adjuvant. but Thou, O God, hidest those things from the wise and prudent of the world and revealest them to babes and sucklings, e∣ven so it is thy will: Thou pullest downe the mighty from their seate, and exaltest the humble and meeke, Luke 2. revealing that mystery, that was hid from ages and generations. Col. 1. 26. 27. Testified likewise, Iohn 4. 27. he is found talking with a Gentle-woman, shewing himselfe to be a Iesus, a Saviour to her, vers. 10. If thou knewest the gift of God, that is, mee, which am given of my Father: 2 Cor. 9. 15. so called by the Apostle, Thankes be unto God, for his unspeakeable gift; And if thou knewest mee, which am the true immortall Ambrosia, Nectar, and aqua vitae of the Soule-sicke sinners, The fountaine of living waters, Ier. 2. 13. The fountaine of Israel, Psal. 68. 26. all this he is, even to the Gentile, Iohn 4. 26. I that speake unto thee am hee, I am the expectation of you Gentiles. The sides of the North, Populus Gen∣tium erant la∣ter Diaboli propter conjun∣ct m amiciti∣am. Stella su∣per Luc. which Satan challenged for his owne seate and Pontificiall throne, Esay 14. 13, are become the Citie of the great King Ie∣sus Christ, Psa 48. 3. so that even as a stone though malleable, is hardly brought to frame and square to his fit place in a building, yet being labori∣ously hammered is durable, and of long conti∣nuance; so the Gentiles were a most crabbed, wilde stocke to plant in; Chrys in cap. 3. Math. a most crooked timber to hewe for Gods building: yet being planted and brought to the faith, they are most perma∣nent, gathered into the inclosed garden of Gods Church. Reason 1. Reas. 1. That they might shewe forth the wonderfull riches of Gods mercy: the greater the sinner the richer the mercy that saves him, as Gods mercy appeared more in calling one cove∣tous Publican, one incontinent Magdalene, one Saul as bloody as Nero or Iulian, one lost sheepe to be brought home, Luk. 15. one prophane Gen∣tile, than in a multitude that needed no repen∣tance. It is a greater worke of Gods divine ma∣jestie to change a wicked man to a godly, Majus opus est divinae maje∣statis, ex im∣pin pi m sacere quam univer∣sum mundum condidisse. than of nothing to erect the glorious arches of thewhole world, as Paul said of himselfe, Where sin aboun∣ded, there grace more abounded; & 1 Tim. 1. 16. For this cause I obtayned mercy, that in me first Christ Iesus might shew forth all long suffering for a pat∣terne to them, Aug. which should hereafter beleeve on him to life everlasting. Qui adversa∣rium extoll t ja e tem, & amplificat pri∣stinam dignita∣tem, &c Cic Orat. pro M. As the Orator spake: He that exalts his dejected adversary to his auncient place and dignities, and not onely thus, but amplifies his honours, I not onely comparatively equall him with the best of men, but judge him most like to God himselfe. Marcello. It is the glory of a King to passe by offences, saith Eccles. so is Gods mercy made great in pardoning the innumerable sinnes of the East, the abhominations of the Gentiles. In the East was the fall of our first Parents, the unbeleefe of Eva, the disobedience of Adam, Gen. 3. Boskhierus in ara Coeli, co. 10 the fratricide of Cain, Gen. 4. Nimrods rebel∣lion, first Idolatry, Magicke delivered, and taught by those Phantasticke divels Incubus and Succubus, with many more; so that here is the magnifying of his mercy & also of his glory: Simile. As it is a great glory to a King to have strangers from remote parts of the world to bring pre∣sents and submit themselves to his scepter and governement; So is it to have the raging Gen∣tiles, that so long had bandied themselves against the Lord and his annoynted, to yeeld their necks under his yoake: and those lands which like Eze∣chiels bloudy pots had nought but theyr scum in them, Exhalat opaca M phytim. full of Mephyticall stinckes like the five Cities, Virgil. or like the pot among the children of the Prophets, in which was nought but death, and the entoxicating poyson of abhominable vil∣laines, should at the last like Noahs sacrifice be a favour of rest in the nosthrils of Almighty God, pots of holinesse, like those in Zach. 13. last: And so here is the mercy, love, and glory of God, manifested in the calling of those long-loathed Gentiles. Thus wee see Christs Kingdome ac∣cording to his promises, and prophecyes, reach∣ing from sea to sea, and from the great river to the ends of the World, Boskhierius v∣bi supra. as the Angell said, Of his Kingdome shall be no end; Imperium O∣ceano, famam non terminat astris. not onely in regard of the stability, and durance; but also of the bound∣lesse interminable amplitude thereof; The Ocean shall not bound his regiment, His fame shall flie above the firmament. Else, where had beene those huge Nations, which have bin converted to the faith, some by Apostles &c. to omit the rest, our selves which long lay in the darknesse of superstitious Genti∣lisme: and of late times by those famous Colonies in Virginia, brought from worshipping of Di∣vils (mirabile dictu) to worship the true God in spirit and truth, the instruments of whose hap∣py calling were our famous English. If the mer∣cy of God had not appeared, how had wee and the most part of the world still remained in hor∣rible blindnesse, slaves to Satan, and heires of eter∣nall perdition. Come unto us then, miserably blinded Turkes, Infidels, and Pagans, and we will tell you what God hath done for our soules; we have tasted how true, how gracious the Lord is: the Sea of knowledge which Esay spake of, is ac∣complished among the Churches of the Gen∣tiles. Ier. 16. 19. Ieremie said, They should come unto God, from the ends of the earth, and it is fullfilled; the con∣course to the preaching of the Word, foretold by Micah and Zacharie, is verified, Mic. 4. 1. Zach. 8. 20. This day are these Scriptures fulfil∣led in our eares. Thus much for confirmation of the Doctrine, the uses follow. First to teach us to magnifie the glorious name of God, Ʋse 1. who hath called us out of darknesse in∣to the marveilous light of the saving knowledge of Christ. If we should make a quare with David, concerning the generall estate of man, What is man that thou art so mindfull of him? or of him∣selfe, What am I, and what is my Fathers house? Why, we were even a refused people, in whom there was neither favour nor beauty, without hope, without God in the World, children even whose profession was disobedience, drowned in the sinke of abhominations: Our religion (if we had any) was mere idolatry; Quicquid humus, pelagus, coelum, mirabile gignit, Id dixere Deos, colles, freta, flumina, flammas. What'ere the God of nature hath made strange, In Sea, in earth, in hill, floud, fire, or skie, The Gentiles from their lawfull use did change And made them gods in their Idolatrie. Nay even the dropping cloudes, Otho Frisin∣gensis ex Phi∣lone. and fire was the god of the Chaldes, who having devoured all the other woodden deities, Ruffinus Eccl. Hist lib 2 cap. 26. Puras nu∣bes & coeli un∣men adornant. Iuven. Sat. 14 was confuted by Ca∣nopis, with a cauldron of water, which quenched that furious Idol. Nothing so base, but they gave Gods honour unto it, Rom. 1. 23. Changing the glory of the incorruptible God, into an image made like unto corruptible man, Citius apud vos per omnes De∣os, quam per v∣num genium Caesaris pejera∣tur. In Apel∣con. Gentes. &c. Caesar (as Tertullian upbraides them) was so sacred, that it was more tollerable to sweare & forswear by all the Gods, than by him: Nay in all the whole course of their lives, they were so abhominable, and debauched, that when the Scripture would aggravate and make a sinne seeme Hyperbolically great, & paint it in the true colours, he sends us to the Gentiles for patternes, being as truely Doctored in the act∣ing of sinnes, as the Iesuites in the art of poyso∣ning: As against distrust, Math. 6. 32. For after all these things doe the Gentiles seeke: . They sought with all their might, arising from a distrust of Gods providence For incontinent incest, 1 Cor. 5. 1. It is reported, that there is such fornication a∣mong you, as is not named among the Gentiles, that one should have his fathers Wife; which is spoken as negative of the Gentiles, to aggravate the hai∣nousnes of it; for we reade their common prac∣tice thereof in the Iliade of their abhominati∣ons, Antiocho filiò cessit. Plutar. as the wife of Seleucus a Gentile, became af∣ter the wife of Antiochus his sonne. Then were Nicholaitans in Ephesus, Amos 2. 7. Reu. 2. 6. a Church of the Gentiles, in their common conversation, not onely being dishonest, but hating honestie in o∣thers, in somuch as one Hermodorus was banish∣ed from Ephesus, because he was an honest man; s was Aristides out of Athens, Iustus quia iu stus. for no other cause, but for his justice. And so it was their opinion of honesty, Te colui vir∣tus vt res, ast tu nomen iaanc es. Livie. as Brutus opinioned vertue, I honour thee vertue, as something, but thou art indeed nothing but an empty name. No sinne so sensuall, so sence∣lesse, so unnaturall, unreasonable, but they have beene actors thereof, Greg. Mag. hom. 10. in E∣vang. And as the knowledge of CHRIST was preached to the Iewes by an Angell, as to a people endued with reason; so was it to the Gentiles by signes, nor by voyce, as to a foolish people, with the Prodigall, feeding themselves with the huskes of their base affecti∣ons. Simile Chrys. in cap. 19. Mas And as a burthen is easily stayed upon the backe of a Camell, by reason of his bunch; so the diveli kept those Gentiles easily in their blind∣nesse, Ne noceat. causing them for feare to worship him, and offer him sacrifice, as those so tish Indians, the Pigusians &c. Then learne wee to magnifie the name of our God; It is an honourable thing to speake of the workes of God, Tob. 12. that was so mindfull of us, when wee were not mindfull of our selves; when our hearts like Ephraims, Hos. 7. 11. as a silly Dove deceived, Cucurrit. even then hee ranne to meete us, fell on our neckes, and kissed us, with the kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1. 1. fearing to be too late in shewing mercy; whereas in the execution of his justice and wrath, Ambulavi . Gen. 3. 8. hee walked slowly. Vs that were Captaines in mis∣chiefe hath hee called out of the fooles Para∣dise, and inchanted castle of Satans baites, and set us upon the Rocke that was higher than us, the rocke of Salvation CHRIST IESVS: So that wee may say with the Governour of the feast, Ioh. 2. 10. The good wine was kept till now; the firkins of the Iewes were but water to these, beggarly rudiments. See then and admire the infinite mercy of Almighty God, to call thee beloved, which wast not beloved; to remove thee from under the regiment of Satan, to draw thee out of his power, as David did the Lambes from the Lyon and the Beare: broken the shac∣kles and manacles of that more than Aegyptian, Babylonish, or Turkish slaverie; taken thee as Abraham out of idolatrous Chaldea, Lot out of Sodome, or a firebrand out of the fire, and set thee in the glorious liberty of the new Ierusa∣lem, confirmed thy Charter to the Kingdome of Heaven. Leape upon thy feete then with the Cripple at the beautifull gate of the Temple, and praise thy God, Acts 3. 8. Let him bee praised, that hath brought thee home like the lost sheepe upon the shoulders of his Mercy, sought thee out with the light and lanthorne of his Word, perswa∣ded thee by his Spirit, called thee from thy ba∣nishment, enfranchised thee. Tristatur non de sua inturia, sed de nostra miseria. Chrys. Hee that was in∣carnate and made Man for thee, grieved and wept for thee, sweat water and blood for thee, hung on the Crosse for the malice of Men and Divels; for thee, &c; give then the glory unto him. Here is a behold of stupefying wonder, Psal. Ecce. 18. 43. A people whom I have not knowne, shall serve me; As soone as they heare of mee, they shall obey me: The Oxe hath knowne his owner, and the Asse his Masters crib, Esay 1. 3. I am found of them that seeke me not. An admirable and sur∣passing miracle, that those which did bandy themselves against the Lord, and his Annointed, should willingly put their neckes under his yoake. Velut jugum ipsum ambirè Besthier. O worke above all expectation! Christ to ride upon the Asse-colt unused to the yoake; Belial to bee turned to CHRIST, Zoroastres in∣to Moses, Surgunt indccti & coelum rapi∣unt. Aug Conf. Superstition into Religion, Orgyes in∣to mysteries, sacriledge into Sacrifice, dogs into Saints, Quaenam est ista permutatio apud Iudaeos, propheta loqui∣tur, & non au∣ditur; apud Gentiles stella tacet & sua∣det. B. Max. in Esa. publicans and harlots to teach the way to heaven, the scholler reading a lecture to the Master, the one reading the most secret mystery of mans salvation wrapped in the sacred leaves of Gods eternall Counsell, and that by a dumbe starre; the other standing amazedly sottish at the lively voyce of Gods learned interpreters; the one as it were striving whether faith, Proximus Ec∣clesie semper vult ultimus esse. the other whether unbeleefe should prevaile: the nerer the Church the farther from God; the poore receive the Gospell. See then the unmeasurable riches of Gods free mercies, hee will have mercy Vpon whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he har∣dens, Ro. 9. It is not of him that runneth, nor of him that willeth, but of God that sheweth mercy. Consider further, that mankinde may be divi∣ded into a tripartite ranke; First, are those most remote, and farre off from the covenant, upon whom God in his unfearchable judgements hath not vouchsafed so much as an outward calling: Gen. 9. 25. Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren; as Pagans, Infidels, &c. which stand in the outmost Circle, Tanquam vul∣tures ad male olentia ferun∣tur. Basil. which delight in Atheisme, as Vultures passe over sweete meadowes, and fragrant groves, to passe to loath some carryon; these like Noah do not a∣wake from their drunkennes, hardnesse of heart, &c. Secondly, are those w ch stand in the next Court within the visible Church, and are as tares with wheate, bad fish with good, corrupted humors in a sound body, Cain with Abel, drosse with gold, Vessels of dishonour with Vessels of ho∣nour, 2 Tim. 2. Which may have the ordinary giftes of the Spirit; they may prophecy with Saul and Cajaphas, preach and doe miracles with Iudas, speake like the Oracle of God with Achi tophel, cry Lord, Lord, Math. 7. 22; challenge an interest in the free demesnes of heaven, Math. 25. 11. Open to us; and yet are sent packing to their hell home with a nescio vos, I know ye not. If ye aske the reason and cause of it, Our Saviour CHRIST orally, and oraculously returnes it, Math. 11. 25. This mystery of Salvation is hid from some, and revealed to others, even So Fa∣ther, for so it seemed good in thy sight; as in a Prin∣ces Proclamation, It is our pleasure. All the workes of these men failing in their end, not done in faith to the glory of God, and if God rewarded them, it was temporally, for temporall respects, the good of mankind, civill order and society; not shewing any approbation thereof in respect of himselfe: their mercy, justice, conti∣nency &c. Infideliter mi∣sereri vitium est, peccatū est. being without faith was sinne, as Au∣gustin saith; which indeed ariseth not from the act of compassion; Aug. lib. 4. cap. 3. contra Iulian but from the privation of faith; they may have these and many more ho∣nest civill moralities, but they never have the in∣ward calling, the donation of faith, the true knowledge of God. I know my sheepe, and am knowne of mine; Iohn 10. 14. which knowledge is like the Sunne casting his beames upon us, by whose reflection we looke upon and viewe the Sunne. Gal. 4. 9. Seeing ye know God, or rather are knowne of God: If they have any, it is a literall, no saving or spirituall knowledge, no true love of God, for he never knew or loved them. 1 Iohn 4. 19. We love God, because he loved us first. If these carnall Capernaites follow CHRIST, doing his will in any thing, it is more for his loaves than his love, Ioh. 6. 26. all proceeding from some s ni∣ster respect, their praise or profit; they never have the inward beautifying of the Church, To be all glorious within, Psal. 45. 13. the rich habili∣ments and garments, wherewith (as Isaac decked his beloved Rebecca, and the King of Persia reli∣gious Mordecai) CHRIST I SVS bespangleth his spouse. These be the foolish Virgins, Anima aut Christi sponsa, aut diaboli a∣dultera. Aug. which a long time had their lives blossoming, as if their soules had bin the maidenly bride of CHRIST, when in the end they were unvailed, and found the speck∣led adulteresses, and uncleane concubines of Sa∣tan, Math. 25. This is the man boldly intruding himselfe into the marriage supper, not having on a wedding garment, his faith; but figge leaves notable to cover his nakednes, Math. 22. These walke like friends in the Church of God to∣gether, But many are called, and fewe are cho∣sen. In the third ranke are they, which out of the brazen mountaines of Gods election, flowing out of the rivers of his endlesse mercy, which are not onely within the skirts and territories of his regiment, as the former; but they are in∣wardly sanctified, called, and culled out of the whole heape and masse of Mankind by a lively Faith, engraffed and planted into the mysticall body, and have as neare an union and communi∣on with their head CHRIST, as the branch hath with the vine, the members with the head, or the husband with the wife; Ephes. 5. 30. We are mem∣bers of his body, of his flesh and of his bones: these are built upon the sure foundation, the rocke of safety, and horne of salvation, Luke 1: 69. He is the corner stone, upon which their whole building is coupled, Eph. 2. 20 No other foundation can any man lay, than that which is already laid, which is IESVS CHRIST; 1 Cor. 3. 11. and, These are li∣ving stones built upon him, 1 Per, 2. 5. Othoniel de∣livered the Israelites from Chushan, and is there∣fore called their Saviour, Iudg. 3. 9. but they fell againe into the hand of Moab, Ehud rescued them from the Moabites, and they became servants to the Canaanites, Iudg. 4. 2. A Physitian may cure a man of one disease, and he may after fall into another, or the same, and dye of it: But CHRIST hath them sure, Iohn 10. 28. I give my sheepe eternall life, and they shall never perish; hee hath washed away the r sinnes, and made a pas∣sage to heaven, a perfect and sure rocke of safety, upon which these are placed. Antiquam generis labem mortalibus agris Abluit, Sannazarius de Parta virginis. lib. 1. obstructique viam patefecit Olympi. Poore mortals sicke, he washed hath from auncient staine Originall, And opened wide Olympus path that barred was and shut to all. So that here, the gates of Hell, and Luciferiall powers of darknesse may shoote their darts of poysoned malice, as against CHRIST the head, Math. 4. so against these the members, to be re∣torted upon themselves, as from a tower of brasse; for hee that keepeth Israel doth neither slumber nor sleepe; and though the two first parts be cut off and dye, the third will the Lord fine as Silver and Gold, Zach. 13. 9. And from this consideration ariseth a Cordi∣all, Cordiall. a Caveat, and a dolefull Madrigall. First, it affords a comfortable cordiall to the Christian, that he is one of those secret ones, inwardly cal∣led, separated from the world, and endued with power from above: This is the summum bonum and chiefe dignitie and blessednesse of all other; So that it may be said of him, as a certaine hea∣then, of a wise man, Sapiens unomi∣nor est Ioue. of a wise man, He is onely lesse then God: And as another spake of the vertuous, Horat. He that hath vertue, Omnia ei as∣sunt bona, quem penes est vir∣tus. Plaut. in Amphit. hath with her (as a dowrie) all good things. As the Lord of hoastes, and of the whole earth, and all that therein is, Psal. 24. 1. accounteth it his greatest dignity, and title of honour to be sti∣led The Lord God of Israel, of his Church, Luk. 1. 67. as thence receiving his greatest honour: So is it the chiefest honour of a man to be an Israe∣lite, a limme and member of that Society, of the Communion of Saints. It is indeed the worlds felicity to build pillars with Absalom, towers with Nimrod, to call our lands after our owne names, to engrosse rich revenewes, Parsonages, and patrimonies for our posterity, to build our nests on high, and to covet an evill covetousnes to our houses, while The stones cry out of the wall, and the beame out of the timber answere it, Hab. 2. 9. worse than the King of Sodome, Gen. 14. 21. Give me the soules, and take the goods to thy selfe: But we say to the spirituall king of Sodome the divell, give us the goods, and take our soules to thy selfe. This is our hope, and our posterity praise our doing, selling our Saviour for thirty pence, our heaven for a messe of pottage, and our soules laied in the banke for a quid dabitis? What will ye give me? Ps. 4. 6. Who will shew us any good? O mi∣serable mucke-worme, that sellest thy soule and thy solace, Non dom aut fundus, on aeris acervus & au∣ri, Aegroto do∣mino deducunt corpore febres. thy heaven and thy happinesse for these faile-friends, which in the time of neede cannot so much as cure the aking of thy finger, much lesse give ease to a sinne-loaden, sin-sicke soule: Horat. All they can doe, is to attend thy loath∣some corps, like a ricke of hay to thy cursed bu∣riall. But the Godly with David place their fe∣licity in the remission of sinnes, Psal. 32. 1. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputeth no sinne: In Gods favourable countenance, Psal. 4. 6. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us; and this exceedes all things else as farre as the Sunne excelleth the least light-borrowing starre, as the purest gold, the foulest drosse; the poorest officer in this fraternity, is preferred before a scepter-swaying Monarch, Psal. 84. 10. I had rather be a doore keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickednesse. Here is keyes before crownes, caitiffes before Kings, Lazarus before Lords: What then will it profit a man to winne the whole world, and to lose his owne soule? Mat. 16. 26. Extra Ecclesi∣am nulla salus. Remove thy selfe then from all societies, and joyne thy selfe unto this, as Moses left the i∣dolatrous prophane court of Pharao; and refused to be called the sonne of Pharaohs daughter, and joyned himselfe to Gods people, Heb. 11. 24. So doe thou shun the tents of wickednes, & when all the wicked societies in the world shall be deplu∣med and cast into hell, thou shalt be received into everlasting habitations. Reioyce in the Lord, and againe I say, reioyce, Phil. 4. 4. Next is the Caveat; Caveat. and this like a watchman standing upon a turret of the Temple, gives war∣ning to take heed to the calling, whereunto God hath called us, and to walke worthy of it. As it was with the Egyptians and Israel, wheresoever the one was, there was darknesse, but the other had light: So must Gods people be discerned from others by the light of theyr conversation, shining as a candle upon a candlesticke, in the sight of all, 1 Pet. 2. 11. as a citty, or beacon upon a hill. Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they seeing your good workes, may glorifie God in the day of their visitation. A Christian must take heede how he walkes; hence the Apostles Caveat for thy feete, Ephes. 5. Walke circumspectly: For thy tongue, let no filthy communication pro∣ceed out of thy mouth; it must not be like Shal∣lecheth, but the beautifull gate of the Temple: Full of grace are thy lips, Psal. 45. For thy loynes, they must not be loose and lascivious, but girt; For thy eyes, Iob. 31. 1. I have made a covenant with mint eyes, and so for the rest, all must be like the strings of a Davidicall Harpe in tune: All thy wayes are marked, and by thy weakenesse, and upon thine infirmities the prophane wretch layes the lawfulnesse of his impieties. If the Ab∣bot pipes, Citharizante Abbate, tripu∣diant Monachi. the Monkes daunce; As Popish pic∣tures and images are lay-mens bookes; so exam∣ples are the bests patternes, Longum iter per verba, bre∣ve & compen∣dio sum per ex∣empla. Seneca. and most followed. One vivall is better than ten vocall instruments. A Christian is the salt of the earth, if he loose his savour, wherewith must he be seasoned? Take heede then of stayning thy profession, Si doctcr erra∣verit, quo alio doctore emenda∣dabitur? Hiero∣ny. whether generall or particular; In thee every mote is a mountaine, every cicatrice a Cocatrice, and eve∣ry fall is a full sea of iniquity. As it is unseemely for Achilles to have the base behaviour, and be a drudge to the servile offices of Thersites: So is it for a Christian nobly sprung of the bloud royall of heaven, to bowe himselfe to the base drugge∣ry of the most base of creatures, Satan. Agnosce O Christiane, Leo Serm. 1 de Nativ. Christi. dignitatem tuam, & divine consors factus naturae, noli in veterem vilitatem degeneri conversatione redire: memento cujus capitis, & cuius corporis sis membrum, reminiscere quòd erutus de po∣testate tenebrarū, translatus es in Dei lumen & reg∣num: Acknowledge, O Christian, thy dignity, and that thou art made partaker by the divine nature: re∣turne not into thy old vilenesse of thy degenerate con∣versation; remember of whose head, and of whose bo∣dy thou art a member remember that thou art taken out of the power of darkenesse, and translated into the light and kingdome of God. Vse then thy graces to Gods glory; If thou hast bin a dogge, a Gen∣tile, returne not to thy vomit; If thou hast bin at the custome house, returne not with Demas, but keepe thy profession unstained with Mathew. How greivous is it unto almighty God, to give give graces to dishonour himselfe withall. As C r shreatned to the river Gindes, Herodotus in Clio. that had drowned one of his white horses, to cut it into so many chanels, till it should loose both depth, name and glory; So will God deale with our vertues and graces, plucke them from us if wee abuse them, and leave us to a multitude of enor∣mous impieties, suffer the divell to re-enter us with seaven worse than himselfe, Math. 12. 26. fill us so full of the tares of iniquity, that not the glory, nay scarce, the name of Christian shall be left writ∣ten upon us: as may be seene in Saul, 1 Sam. 10. 24. See ye him whom the Lord hath chosen, that there is none like unto him among the people, endued with excellent gifts of governement, and fought many excellent battels of the Lord; but when he began to rebell, and goe against the comman∣dement of God, as in the matter of Agag, Chap. 15. then Chap. 16. 14. The spirit of the Lord departed from him, and an evill spirit from the Lord trou∣bled him, deprived and deplumed of all those graces of excellent government. The like we see in Iulian, Vide Hist. Ec∣clesiast. Tri∣partit. lib. 6. cap. 1. who being borne of Christian parents, from the line of religious Con∣stantine, so carefully lettered and educated in Christianity, and that under Christian teachers, that he was forbidden to heare Libanius the Sy∣rian, because he was a Pagan: Yet afterwards hearkning to the Pagans, he was deprived of the profession of the Crosse, and became a fearefull Apostats, both an Ismael with his tongue and pen, and an Esau with his sword, persecuting his former profession, blasphemously continuing therein to his last gaspe, which was breathed out full of blasphemi ; when the fatall dart had gi∣ven him his deadly wound, whether by the mi∣nistry of men or Angell, he filled his hand with his bloud and cast it into the ayre, saying thus re∣prochfully of CHRIST, Ʋicisti Gali∣l e. Theod rit. Hist. tripart. lib. 6. cap. 46. Thou hast overco e, O thou Galelian. The like of Nero, whose first five yeares were peaceable and gracious, that we might say of him as Suetonius of T tus, He was the love and delight of mankind: But after falling to st ddy Magicke, and sold himselfe to a Lern and ltitude of vices, Corpore fuit maceluso & fae∣do. Sueton. in Net. Plin. lib. 30. cap. that he made his minde as filthy as his bo∣dy, he lost all vertue, and became the vilest Monster that ever the earth bred, Niceph. lib. 2. Eccles. Hist. cap. 37. or bore: hee delighted as much in villanies and strange mur∣thers, as ever he did in his Musicke; Notu feritate Lycaon. Ovid. lib. 1. Metam. the first per∣secuter of the Church among the Romane Em∣perors in the Martyrdome of Paul and Peter, a Saul -like bloud sucker in fratricide, marricide, and what not: a monster of men, notable in no∣thing but cruelty, and villany, a strange Lycan∣thropicisme, inward, outward, all wolvish; that it is truely verifyed of him, which was pro∣ved upon Pope Alexander the 6, his parallell in most things, Spongi san∣guinis. That he was a spounge of bloud: And the like may we see in the Church of Rome, dege∣nerate from her primitive purity, to that height of abhominations. Therefore let us (as it is counselled to the Church of Thyatira, R . 2. 25) Hold fast, let no man take away the crowne of our profession, let us be knowne by our workes; Let thy light shine when the cloudy children of darknesse grope at noone day as the blinded So∣domites: Be thou that one among a thousand, of whom the Heathen; —Vix repperit vnum, In calce Opus . Virgilij. Millibm è multis hominem consultus Apollo. The Or cle Apollo being askt, Scarce of a thousand findes a man but maskt. Let then thy love to God, to his word, be without dissimulation, thy profession without hypocrisie, thy calling and conversation without staine, that thou mayest be found blamelesse in the great day of the Lord. Last, from these considerations ariseth an E∣legiacall or dolefull Madrigall, Madrigall E∣zek. 2. 19. which (like Eze∣ki ls booke) is written within and without, the contents whereof is nothing but lamentations, and mourning and woe: Or Zacharies flying booke of judgements, Zach. 5. which shall light upon the head of every hypocriticall and impenitent person, though he stand within the Circle of the visible Church, even wrapped up with cursed Cham, in the compasse of the Arke of safety; standing in the way while CHRIST passeth by, and not so much as touching the hemme of his garment; abiding in the garden while it is wa∣tered and planted, and yet remaining withered and rootelesse; lying by the all-curing poole of Bethes while the Angell moveth the waters, Iob. 5. and not moving a foote to be washed, ha∣ving the prophet directing thee to Iordan, and never bathing for thy leprosie, 2 Kings, 5. living in the fruitfull Gilead, and never tasting the sweetenesse of the balme; Ier. 8. last verse. Heare this all ye that stand as yet strangers from grace, that have not yet broken the strong cordes of your sinnes, have made no divorce and separation betwixt you and your iniquities; what greife of heart should this be to con∣sider, how many have beene cloathed in white roabes, and you still remaine in your Gibeoni∣tish ragges; to see the grace of God in abundance (as the holy Ghost at Pentecost) Acts 2. lighting on every side of you, in the countrey, towne, fami∣ly and society wherein we live, and you remaine the barren figge tree, Telluris in u∣tile pondus. troubling the ground. To see the raine (as in Ahabi time) watering and fructifying every soyle, but your owne: To see the showre wetting euery stone in the streete, and you still abiding under the pent-house; to see e∣uery one receiving a penny, and you remayne i∣dle in the market place; to see lampes full of oyle, and yours empty. Should not this cause thee to breathe out thy dolefull Madrigall, Wretched man that I am, Rom. 7. how miserable and lamentable is thy estate? Pray then beloved for the dew of grace, supplicate with the spouse: Awake O north wind, Can. 4. 16. & come thou south, blow upon my garden, that the spices therof may flowe out; that the spirit of Grace may season thee; that the Lord would open unto thee, Zach. 12. 10. the fountaine promised to the house of David and the inhabitants of Ierusalem; for sinne and uncleannesse, Zach. 13. . Till then thou stand∣est a stranger from God, from Christ, and hast no pa t or portion in salvation. Suffer not thine eyes to sleepe, nor thine eye lids to slumber untill thou finde out a place for the Lord, even thy soule to be an habitation for the mighty God of Iacob, Psal. 132. 4. Let the want of Christ ent thy heart, and distill as in a limbecke thy pumice eyes, and flin∣ty heart into teares; and let the heads of the dra∣gons, thy sinnes Be broken in these waters. In the meane time I dare not send thee to despaire, I have no such commission, so long as God vouch∣safeth in the out ward calling, to let thee stand in the way of grace, wayting for thy yeare of Iu∣bilee and deliverance; but if it still passe by thee, thou had better never have bin borne, or strang∣led in the birth. To teach us, Ʋse. 2. never to despaire of any mans salva∣tion, but to judge charitably of all men; The first may be last, and the last may be first, and they that are not now under mercy, may goe to heaven before us: We must not be rash in this, as those that have affirmed Salomons damnation. No man must presume to understand above that which is meete to understand, Rom. 12. 3. but he must understand ac∣cording to sobriety; and what it is to understand according to sobriety he expresseth, 1 Cor. 4. 6. No man must presume to understand above that which is written. Reuelation or Euthusiasmes we have none, as the familists & others haue thought; and without word or Revelation wee cannot know, Who knoweth the mind of the Lord, 1 Cor. . 16. He onely knowes who are his, 2 Tim. 2. 19. He imparteth not this mystery unto us, except upon the matter of malicious Apostacie, and inne a∣gainst the Holy Ghost, as in Iulia , L ria , ∣phyry, Heliodorus, &c. 1 Iohn 5. 16. A sinne unto death, which God will not forgive either in this world or in the world to come; a finall revol∣ting and backsliding from God, a totall separati∣on of the soule from the life of grace, without returne; and so we must understand that, eb. 6. 4. It is impossible that they which were once light∣ned, and have tasted of the good word of God, and of the power of the world to come, if they fall away (viz. finally, Novatiani ne∣gabant lapsis poenitentia . vi∣de Niceph. Ec∣cles. hist. lib. 11 cap. 14. totally, maliciously) should be renewed by repentance &c. Orelse we fall into that Heresie, That a man fallen into sinne cannot be re ored by repentance; and so we understand that place. Heb. 10. 26. If we inne willingly after we have recei∣ved the knowledge of the trueth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sinnes, but a fearefull looking for of iudgement, Theodorit. lib. 3. cap. 16. &c. of a generall revolt from CHRIST, mallice against his, as in Arius and Iu∣lian, waging warre against God; not in Abraham twice dissembling, David adulterizing, Ioseph swearing by the life of Pharaoh, though they fell fearefully, insomuch as David, Psal. 73. 22. con∣fesseth himselfe to be a beast in Gods sight; yet he fell not finally, but still as a man in danger of drowning, he started not from the anchor of Gods mercy. Therefore let the rule of charity leade us to a charitable iudging of men which perhaps are not yet under mercy, and say of them as David of the child, 2 Sam. 12. 22. Who can tell whether God will be gracious or no? Never things more unlikely to be performed, than the promise con∣cerning the calling of the Gentiles. CHRIST may be found even upon the Crosse to the con∣demned theefe, Stella super Luc. Luke 23. 40. all his disciples were sted, yet his new disciple boldly confesseth him before his enemies. Here is a marveilous Faith; others beleeved on him when he raised the dead, thou beleevest on him when he is dying. Abra∣ham beleeved God speaking from heaven, Gen. 12. Esay from his throne, Esay 6. Moses from the bush; but thou beleevest him hanging on the Crosse, more like a malefactor than a Messias, a sinner than a Saviour. Surely many have bin glorious beleevers, but thou surpassest them all, Per vnum ver∣bum factus est haeres Paradi∣si. Stella Ibid. by one word speaking is he made heire of Para∣dise; this theefe that came the last to his worke, receives his first paiment, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23. The like may we see, Math. 20. some were called early in the mor∣ning, some at the third houre, some at the sixt and ninth houre, some at the eleventh houre; So some are called in their youth as Iosiah, some at one time, some at another, some one way, some another. We must neither prescribe time nor meanes to almighty God, the supreame Lord and maker of time and meanes; The wind bloweth where it listeth, Iohn 3. 8. where the spirit is compared to wind for the free liberty of it's blowing, and for the power of it: As no man can resist the wind, so no man can resist the working of the Spirit, when God will; as we may see in the con∣version of that rare Luminary of the Church St. Augustine; Vide Aug lib. de Confes. little did he dreame of it, when hee went rather for carping than profiting, to heare Saint Ambrose: Thus Acts 2. 41. Three thousand were called at one sermon of Peters, which even now were mocking the extraordinary giftes of the Spirit in the Apostles: so that God can give grace and shew mercy inter pont em & fontem, be∣twixt the brooke and the bridge. His voy e that causeth the Thunder, and maketh the Hindes to calve, and that mighty voyce of CHRIST, Iohn 11. 17. which shall raise the dead, shall raise thee from the death of sinne, as he did Lazarus that stuncke in the grave. Comfort thy selfe then, he that receiveth the Gentiles casteth away none that come unto him, Iohn 6. 37. Hee that breaketh not the bruised reede, nor quencheth the smoaking flaxe, will not re∣ject thee. Here is comfort for Parents if they have wicked Children, Masters if they have wicked servants, and especially for Ministers if they have prophane Parishioners, and that as yet they have laboured in vaine, Note. and brought forth to the wind; Yet they must expect with patience. Some are called sooner, some later, the vision is yet for an appoynted time, but in the end it shall speake, and not lye, though it tarry, waite for it, because it will surely come, and will not tarry, Hab. 2. 3. The Marriner leaves not the sea, though his voyage be not profitable at the first: the Husbandman leaves not plowing, though as yet he have an ill Harvest: so must not you Pastors, and Parents be discouraged, Iob 1. 5. but (with Iob for your children, with Paul and Samuel for the peo∣ple) offer the incense of your prayers for them: Instruct them, correct them, perswade them, goe as patternes of good lives wisely in and out be∣fore them; and who can tell if the Lord willbe mercifull unto them? But I would not have any emboldned by this, to climbe as high as the sinne of Presump∣tion, Psal. Privilegia paucorum non faciunt legem communem. Stella ubi su∣pra. 19. 13. For as one Swallow makes not a Summer; so the priviledges of a few, make not a generall rule: He saved (saith Saint Au∣gustine) one at the last gaspe, that we should not despaire, and but one, that we should not pre∣sume. We know a wound, the longer it is fe∣stered, the harder it is to be cured: a bird newly taken, struggles in the Cage, but being accusto∣med, is content with her bondage; enemies being entred, are hardly expelled: Qui non est bodie cras mi∣nus aptus eri . Ovid. so with the sinner in his repentance, the longer deferred, the more unfit is a man to performe it: Therefore belo∣ved, rise from the bed of thine iniquities, the stinking grave of thy sinnes, and though thou wert as blacke as the tents of Kedar, hadst seven devils with Magdalene; nay, as many as hee, whose name was Legion, as prophane as a Gentile, as spotted as a Leopard, as filthy as a Swine, or a Dogge; upon thy true repentance, the bloud of CHRIST shall purge thee, and perfume thee, and make thee white as snow in Salmon. To teach vs, Vse. 3. that seeing none are so miserable, but the Gospell can make them happy, none so farre gone in sinne, but the mighty voyce of CHRIST can raise them: then to bewaile the hardnesse of our hearts, that have the same pow∣erfull meanes of salvation in a greater abun∣dance and plentie then they had, and yet remaine obdura e. CHRIST IESVS is not the flower of the garden enclosed, but of the field; not pri∣vate to a few, but may be gathered of all; first in∣deed, Iudg. 6. 37. The fleece of Gideon was wet, and the barne-floore dry, then the barne-floore was wet, and the fleece dry: So first God gave his Law to the seed of Abraham, but afterwards we which were the wilde Olives were ingraffed, and the naturall Olives rejected, Rom. 11. 17. God is now rich unto all that call upon him faithful∣ly; Crux Christi non est ara templi, sed etiam ara mun∣di. Leo. the Crosse is not the altar of the Temple, but the altar of the world; CHRISTS death is sufficient, not onely for part, 2. Cor. 12. 9. but for the whole world of beleevers, though never so weake, My strength is made perfect in weakenesse. If thou wilt not then gather this flower of sa∣ving grace, it is thine owne negligence; it's not enclosed in the garden, but groweth in the com∣mon field, Cant. 2. 1. Can the Gospel, the inex∣hausted treasury of grace, so mightily and pow∣erfully conquer these worlds of people, to the obedience of faith, striking them downe to the ground with Saul, Acts 9. 4. bringing them to such a tender sence of the glorious riches there∣of; and are not our hearts melted and stirred within us? Though the Lord cry and roare, and rouze up himselfe in jealousie as a man of warre; and are not we still deafe and heare not, blind and see not? still putting off our repentance, the forsaking of our vanities, the breaking of our Sampson -like cords of sinne, our removing from our Sodome, our love to the Garlicke and Oni∣ons of Egypt, the stinking sulphurious lakes of lusts and prophanenesse; our-returning with Noahs dove to the arke of safety, and with the profuse prodigall Gentile to our owne fathers house. Multi aeterna∣liter damnan∣tur, & finali∣ter in peccatis detinentur, quia ad vocem do∣mini se non corrigunt. Dio∣nys Cajet. in speculo amat. mundi. Many are eternally damned, and finally detained in their sinnes, because they returne not, when the Lord calleth, but say to morrow wee will repent, while the gate of mercy bee shut. To morrow is the voyce of the Raven which re∣turned not to the Arke, Gen. 8. 7. but the dove comes home with her Olive of peace. Why will yee dye, O house of Israels standing in the desperate estate of the young man, Mortuus Chri∣sto & Deo. Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 20. which was dead unto CHRIST and unto God: Or like Pauls wanton widdowes, which are dead whilst they live, 1. Tim. 5. 6. Was the Word able to raise the Gentiles? suffer it then to conquer thy lusts, to mollifie thy hard heart, to wash thee, to sup∣ple thee in the fountaine of Israel, the Spring of living waters, to be a lanthorne unto thy feet, and a light unto thy pathes, Psal. 119. It is worthy the consideration of the most considerate, that CHRIST is come unto thee. Ioh. 1. 14. The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us: And if thou continue a wicked Cham, a cursed Canaan, a prophane Esau, a flowting Ismael, and comest not unto him by prayer and obedience, Christus venit ad homines, in homines, & contrahomines. and he into thee by his Spirit, Iohn, 14. 17. be sure he will come to thee, and against thee in his judgements to thy most fearefull ruine and de∣struction, Appion. as he came to Herod, Iulian, Antiochus, like a Lionesse bereft of her whelpes, and to the rest of his enemies, Luke 19. 27. Those mine enemies, That would not, that I should reigne over them, bring hither and stay them before me. Kisse the Sonne, least he be angry; and yee perish in the way, Psal. Da mihi domi∣ne te defidera∣re, defiderando quaerere, & quarendo inve∣nire. 2. Inflame my heart, O Lord, with zeale to desire thee, desiring thee, to seeke thee, and give me grace by seeking to finde thee, in the word, Sacraments, &c. To teach us, Vse. 4. that untill a mans eyes be opened, his heart touched, and his soule enlightned, and hee by the Gospell endued with the power of grace from above, he seeth no glory nor excel∣lency in religion and Christianity; like those Gentiles, so long as they wallowed in their sinnes, and superstitious vanities, the pretious word of reconciliation was to them, but as pearles cast before Swine, Math. 7. 6. Or the childrens bread unto doggs, Math. 15. 26. But when the unsearchable riches of CHRIST was preached unto them, a mysterie which from the beginning of the world was hid in God, and not opened to the sonnes of men, nor to very Angels, principalities and powers, Eph. 3. 5. 8. 9. the ac∣complishment of which riches, is the glory and joy of heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 12. the Angels desire, and delight to looke into it; we see how inwardly they are affected with it, and they see no glory in any thing else, as the wife of Phineas, 1 Sam 4. 21. calling the arke, Acts 9. 1. the glory of Israel: As Saul, be∣fore an Herod, a Iulian, persecuting CHRIST with as much fury, as any tyrant, breathing out no∣thing but fire and faggot; yet when he was smit∣ten downe to the ground by the powerfull voyce of CHRIST, he became a most zealous Preacher of the trueth, in which formerly hee saw no glory; and a pillar of that Church, which even now he would have pulled downe, and de∣sires to know nothing but CHRIST and him cru∣cified, Gal. 6. 14. he joyes in nothing else. Those also, Acts 2. 13. that were mocking the gifts of the Spirit in the Apostles, affirming the heate of too much wine to cause that volubility of strāge languages among them: Yet when Peter had taught them, that it was the accomplishment of Gods faithfull promise prophecyed by Ioel, chap. 2. 28. of the powring out the bottom∣lesse Ocean of Gods Spirit in the gifts and graces thereof upon all flesh; and had applied a corra∣sive of redargution and reproofe unto them for crucifying CHRIST, they are changed and prick∣ed in their hearts, longing after the way of salve∣tion, vers. 37. Men and brethren, what shall we doe? The like wee see, Acts 16, in the laylor, when hee heard Paul and Silas praying and singing Psalmes in the Prison, he is presently like King Saul, 1 Sam: 10. 9. when the Spirit of God came upon him, changed into another man: So in him was a strange alteration, being cast downe by the mi∣raculous earthquake, and the cohibition of Paul, verse 29. his backwardnesse into forwardnesse, he called for a light and sprang in; his pride into humility, he came trembling and fell downe; his cruelty in his former insulting over them, into compassionate mercy, he brought them forth; his desire (which was formerly to persecute them) to be saved by them, What shall I doe to be saved? So the sinne-sunke citizen woman, that had a long time almost rotted in the Dead Sea, and sulphureous Asphaltites of loathsome lust, hearing of a IESVS a Saviour, though in a proud Pharisies house, Luke 7. 37. stickes neither for costly oyntment to annoynt him, nor s a e to stand behind him, nor plenty of teares to wash his feete, who was watering her soule with the dewe of Grace; nor her haire, which sometime (like Nauplius his lights to bring the Grecian fleet to destruction, Nauplius vl∣turus necem fi∣lij sui Palame∣dis, falso indi∣cio Graecis Tro∣ja victa, rede∣untibus facem è scopulis tan∣quam è portu ostentavit &c. in revenge of his sonne Palame∣des) was as a baite to ensnare the hurtlesse passen∣ger, to wipe his feete, which was to wipe her soule with the immaculate sacrifice of his owne bloud, Iohn, 1. 29. Thus we see Publicans and sinners, when once they are touched in remorse for finne, Dictus Creten∣sis de reditu Graecorum. how deepely they are affected, and inwardly touched, Rom. 7. 24. Wretched man that I am, Dares hr Pygi∣us. who shall de∣liver me from the body of this death? even with Ezekiah, Esay 38. 14. To chatter like a Crane, or a swallow, and mourne like a dove with David, Iob, and the children of God; with prayers, teares, watchings, mournings, to fill heaven and earth for the pardon of theyr sinnes, their recon∣ciliation with God, the peace of conscience, the comfort of the Spirit of comfort, and the Salva∣tion of their soules. When the civill honest man is scarcely moved with any sence or feeling of the need of his conversion, he feeles no sweet∣nesse in the word, which is sweeter than honie, or the honie combe, Psal. 19. 10. He feeles no need of it, Recta & sana doctrina est sua∣vissimus pastus animorum. and yet Iob esteemes it above his ordinary food: we have our spirituall life by it, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Being borne anew, not of mortall, but of im∣mortall seede by the word of God, which liveth and endureth for ever. We have Gods benefits for his words sake, 2 Sam. 7. 21. For thy words sake, and according to thy promise, hast thou done all these great things: The preaching there of makes Sa an fall downe as lightning, Luke 10. 18. Wit∣nesse those new found Indi , lamaica, Iappo, Vir∣ginia, which have formerly had a strange fami∣liar commerce with Satan, and have sacrificed unto him, though not for love, yet for feare of heart; Ex histor. vni∣versali vtrius∣que Indiae. as the Pigusians every morning runne with baskets full of rice to pacifi him in the shape of a blacke dogge, with many more brutish bene∣volences to him. So soone as Christopher Columbus and others had discovered them, and planted the Gospell in some parts of them, how deepely have these poore Pagans bin affected, & the kingdome of Satan demolished, that now seldome or never he appeares among them: He sees no power in it, he accounts of the threatnings denounced out of the Word, but as Morbasan the Turke did of the Excommunication of Pius 2. when he sent him word to call in his Epigrams: Thus doe wicked men and civil honest men, when God threatens the confiscation of their consciences, their banishment from heaven, and hanging in hell: Like those, Esay 28. 15. which have made a covenant with death, and are at an agreement with hell, when the overflowing scourge shall passe through, it shall not come nigh us, when as heaven and earth shall passe, and be melted like waxe at the presence of God in the day of conflagration, before one title either of the threatnings, or promises of God in the Word shall be dissolved, but fulfilled. Hee sees no comfort in the Sacrament, which is offered, the true and living bread which came downe from heaven, Ioh 6. 32. the bread of life, verse 48. My flesh is meate indeed, and my bloud is drinke in∣deed; and so of the rest of Gods holy ordinan∣ces, in which the sonnes of the earth find no favour, no sweetnesse, or comfort, but like the Cocke on the dunghill, esteeme a barley corne above a pearle. Whereas the man whose eyes are opened, makes them his comfort in the house of his pilgrimage: he sees nothing in those mun∣dane and sublunary vanities, but griefe and vex∣ation of spirit; onely in Religion, and the wayes of godlinesse is his repose and rest, he saith with Paul, 1 Tim. 6. 6. Without controversie great is the gaine of god∣linesse, his soule is filled with marrow and fat∣nesse; be esteemes it as Balaam prophecied of the glory of the Church, Numb. 24. 5. How good∣ly are thy tents O Iacob, and thy tabernacles, O Isra∣el! O let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his, Num. 23. 10. To teach us, to acknowledge the wonderfull power of God in the salvation of man, when our estates in Gentilisme were most desperate and miserable, 1 Iohn 5. 9. The whole world lying in wickednesse. Or as Esay, Chap. 35. 1. cals the Gen∣tiles a wildernesse, a desert, unfruitfull, barren, rough, and good for nought, but to be dennes for wilde Beasts, Dragons, and Serpents: Even so we were a habitation (not for the mighty God of Iacob) but for the infernall Dragon the Devill; yet by Gods powerfull grace, this wildernesse exceeds Lebanon, and Carmel for fruitfulnesse, he hath made this desert to flourish as a rose, he hath made this wilde Olive to be grafted in, and be made partaker of the roote and fatnesse of the Olive tree, Rom. 11. 17. hath made us unto God the sweet savour of Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 15. From re∣jected, refuse, and cast-away stones which the builders refused, hath powerfully raised us up children to Abraham, Mat. 3. 9. hath made us of strangers from the true God, sacrificing with the Athenians, Act. 17. 23. to the unknowne God, Elobim genti∣um sunt Eli∣lim. Psal. 96, 5. The gods of the Nations, are vanities, to be partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. hath given us the Spirit of wisedome, Eph. 1. 17. He hath opened the barren wombe of Sara, and made it fruitfull in the Childe of promise, hath opened the uncircumcised hearts of the uncircumcision of the Gentiles; hath turned the dry rockes into pooles of water, so that these things which are impossible with men, Luke 18. 27. are possible with God. Learne then to acknowledge it the mighty power of God, to call a sinner from Iezabels loa∣thed bed, into the glorious liberty of the sonnes of God. Say then with Dauid, The right hand of the Lord bringeth mighty things to passe. And let us which are abjects of the Gentiles, which have no true honour but in Gods covenant, draw wa∣ter with comfort out of these wels of Salvation, Esay 12. Act 10. 34. 3. because God is no accepter of per∣sons. The promises of the Gospell are universall, Iohn 3. 16. he respects not thy outward respects, Rom. 10. 12. thy lear∣ning, riches, Mat. 11. 28. circumcision, or uncircumcision, but his owne determinate will in electing thee. Iohn 1. 13. What could he see in us Gentiles but a masse of Idola∣tries, Rom. 9 7. and stained pollutions? yet he hath purified us by faith in the bloud of Christ, 1 Iohn 1. 7. Poli∣titians and Statists can see no honour, but in earthly Kingdomes, prophaning their lives, in making it their scope and drift to get riches and honours: But this is that which makes us truely honourable, to be translated out of death into life, to be taken as Abraham, a brand out of Chal∣dea, from Gentilisme to true religion. Let this then be thy comfort, that when all the Machia∣vils, Statists, and Polititians in the world, that have died without CHRIST, and never could see any glory but in vaine-glory, shall be tumbled headlong into ruine and perdition, Esay 30. last verse, thou shalt be received into everlasting ha∣bitations. O taste and see, that the Lord is good, blessed is the man that trusteth in him, Psal. 34. 8. All the Kings of the earth could not have done this; Cyrus, Alexander, and all the rest, who in the power of their armies, and pride of their hearts have wept, because there were no more worlds to conquer, with all their authorities, commands and threatnings could never heale a dogge of his lamenesse; as we see in those two greatest kings of Syria and Israel, both which could not cure Naamans leprosie, as the King of Israel answered, 2 Kings 5. 7. Am I a God to kill and give life, that hee doth send to mee to cure a man of his lepro∣sie? much lesse can they cure a spirituall leprosie of sinne; Esay 32. 3. he can open our lips, Psal. 51. 17. open our eyes to know the hope of our calling, Eph. 1. 18. open our eares, Iob 33. 16. by corrections which he had sealed: he can raise us from death, for he is our resurrection, John 11. 25. which all the power of man, the poole of Bethesda, the wa∣ter of Siloam cannot doe, Ezeh. 47. 8. but onely that Foun∣taine opened to the house of David, Zach. 9. 11. and the In∣habitants of Ierusalem for sinne and uncleannesse, which is CHRIST, Zach. 13. 1. it springs up in thee to eternall life, and thou shalt never thirst after, Aquatantum ascindit quan∣tum descendit. Iohn 4. 14. As other waters flow as high as they descend: So this having it's Spring and Fountaine from life, being the chiefest aqua vitae, stayes not till it bring a man to life through the Channels and conduits of the Word and Sacra∣ments: so the Word is said to drop and distill, Iob 29. Deut. 32. 2 22. This is then the comfort, Esay 55. 7. He that thirsteth come then to the waters and drinke, Ezech. 21. 2 yee that have no silver, come buy and eate, come buy wine and milke without silver and money. Draw then with joy, thou abject of the Gentiles, at this common Fountaine, least being unquenched and as yet scorching in thy transgressions, Apicius had 1000 Cookes. thou be forced with the luxurious Apicius and pampered Epulone, to thirst without mercy or pitty in the place of torments for euermore, Luke 16. 24. To teach us, Vse. 6. that are Gentiles by nature, and yet called by the inmeasurable mercy of God, and that freely by the righteousnes of God made manifest without the Law, Rom. 3. 21. and made the true Israel of God, not outwardly in the flesh, but inwardly by faith and the promise, Rom. 9. 8. The children of the promise are counted for the seede; we which were a farre off, Zach. 6. 15. must come to build in the temple of the Lord, the last house, whose glory shall exceed the first, Hag. Iosephus de bel∣lo Iudaico. 2. 10: that is, the spirituall Temple, not that which was reedified by Cyrus, for to this came the liberality of Alexander, and the kings of E∣gypt, with many other; nor the magnificence of Seleucus, 2 Machab. 3. 3. a king of Asia, who of his owne rents was liberall toward the materiall temple: But we are called to build the spirituall Temple, as it came to passe at the calling of the Gentiles how many Master build∣ers, more cunning than Vitruvius, came in to lay the lively stones of this spirituall structure, as Luke the Evangelist from Antioch, Barnabas from Cyprus, Timothy and Titus from Greece, Aristar∣chus, Aquila, Dionysius Areopagita, Onesiphorus, Hermes, with infinite more; and in ages follow∣ing, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Hierom, Basill, Ambrose, Augustine, &c. To come nearer to our own times, what famous Luminaries and lights have shined from Belgia and other parts, 3 Noble men from France, Sadeel, Mor∣ney, and Iuni∣us. as Luther, Calvin, Oecolampadius, Marlorat, Bucer, Bullinger. In our owne times, out of our owne nation, our owne tribes, and families; reverend Fulke, Whitaker, Raynolds, Field, Willet, Perkins, Andrewes, the late Byshop of Winchester, and the present famous Doctor Hall, now Bishop of Exeter, all which have issued out of the darke celles of gentilisme, which have brought their gold, theit silver, and some their lives, to the building of this spiritu∣all Temple. What should this, I say, teach us, but (in tender compassion to the Iewish nation) to pray heartily for their restoring, since they were cut off, that we might be grafted on, Rom. 11. 19 they were the holy seede, the first borne the first and naturall heires to the Gospell, Iudaei primi & naturales here∣des Evangelij. Mat. 15. 22. I am not sent, but unto the lost sheepe of the house of Israel; Calvin lib. 4. cap 16. §. 14. Institut. God chose them above all nati∣ons, Deut. 7 6. he loved them, Deut. 10. 15. Iacob was his portion, Deut. 32. 8. and he hath promi∣sed (though for their ingratitude he hath for a while rejected them, and suffers them as Caines and vagabonds to wander without any abiding place, yet) in the end to call them home, Zach. 12. 10. He will poure upon the house of Iacob, and the inhabitants of Ierusalem, the spirit of grace and supplication, that is, the Holy Ghost with the graces thereof, and which restoring, Paul proves Rom. 9. and 11. that they shall be called and ac∣knowledge CHRIST, and wisheth to be separa∣ted from CHRIST in the ardency of his love toward them, so that they might be restored. O pray then for the peace of Ierusalem, that thy God would performe his promise in their con∣version, with David, Psal. 51. 18. Be favourable unto Sion, and build the wals of Ierusalem; and Paul, my hearty desire for Israel is, that they may be sa∣ved. Let thy heart be greived then to see the horrid desolation of them, as Nehemiah 1. no∣thing could be so pleasant unto him, as the deso∣lation of Ierusalem was greivous; He is but a mercilesse Samaritane, that neglects his duty, and woe to him that is an enemie to Israels common wealth; but let us pray for Ierusalem, that pros∣perity may be within her wals, and peace within her pallaces. [People] that is, The second subject of this duty. as we formerly noted, the Iewe of the stocke of Sem, which God knew be∣fore all nations; Amos 3 2. and thus beloved were they not in regard of themselves, but of Gods free election: So the difference betwixt these two seedes is not because the one embraced CHRIST, and the other refused him; for how can there be a refusall, where the Messias was not knowne? but among the Gentiles he was not so much as named, Rom. 15. 20. as their owne Doctor witnesseth. These Iewes were Gideons fleece, which was watered, when all the world beside was a barren desert; the name of God, the Gospell of CHRIST, his love and favours were appropriated onely to the land of Iury, Mat. 10. 5. Goe not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritanes enter ye not: They thought his providentiall care reached no farther, but was limited within the narrow skirts of Palesti∣na, Iudaei suspica∣bant soli Pale∣stinae ipsum do∣minari, & ip∣sorum tantum∣modo curam a∣gere. and onely to have a care over them, as Theo∣dorit speakes of them; they were as the signet up∣on his right hand, as the apple of his eye, he that cursed them was cursed, and they that blessed them were blessed; nay there is no inchantment against Iacob, nor divination against Israel, Num. 22. 23. he set a beautifull crowne upon their heads, Ezech. 16. 12. that is, established the King∣dome of his grace among them. Yet when they yeelded not correspondence to his word in du∣tifull obedience and thanksgiving, it came to passe as truth it selfe had denounced against them Math. 21. 43. The kingdome of God (which was their crowne and honour) should be taken from them and given to a nation, that should bring forth the fruites thereof. Ierusalem was the city which the Lord did choose to place his name there, 2 Chron. 6. 6. She was a faithfull citie, Esay 1. 21. How is the faithfull city become an Harlot? But de∣parting from her former stepps, Iosephus de bel∣lo Iudaico lib. 7 cap 12. Migre∣mus hinc. Eus. Eccles Hist. crucifying the Sonne of God, and killing his Saints, she was re∣jected and cast off, a voyce from heaven giving warning of her imminent rejection, lib. 3. cap. saying, Let us depart hence. And Almighty God, like old Iacob, layes his right hand upon the head of E∣phraim the younger, and his left hand upon Ma∣nasses the elder, Gen. 48. 14. Now one cluster of the grapes of Ephraim are better than a whole Vintage of Abiezer, Iudg. 8. 2. So now the right hand of honour is laid upon the Gentile, and the Iewes degraded, as the birth-right was convayed from Esau to Iacob, the Priesthood translated from Abiathar to Zadock, and the regall dignity from Saul to David; the prodigall Gentile must have the fat calfe killed, and be brought into the Kings Cellar, when the Elder hath not where∣with to make merry with his friends, Luke 15. 23, &c. Hence this doctrine. God is not tyed to any place or people. Doct. 1. If the chosen Iewes will not bring forth fruits wor∣thy of the Gospell, but despise it; hee will pro∣voke them to envie, even by a people which sought him not, and for sinne will remove his love and favour, his word, and worship, and make it a free passage for the flood-gates of his wrath, to their inevitable destruction, and unavoydable ruine. For confirmation of this truth, wee need goe no further than our proposed patterne and ex∣ample of this people, which was a chosen Cedar among all the trees of the Forest, so long as ho∣linesse kept residence there, the Cisterne into which the Fountaine of all grace powred his blessings by many Conduit-pipes and meanes, but they left their first love, Rev. 2. 4. cryed loud for Christs bloud to fall upon them and their children, Math. 27. 25. and so it did: and now their gold is become drosse, which makes the Prophets complaine that Bethel is become Beth∣aven, the house of God, the house of vanity, the valley of vision into the valley of the shadow of death, Esay 22. 1. Their house is left unto them desolate, Mat. 23. 38. Looke upon that famous Citie, which was the glory of the world, whose turretted Bulwarkes, and huge heapes of well∣compacted Fabricks, made the Disciples to wonder, Mat. 24. 1. Mar. 13. 1. and the Kings of the earth to stand amazed; yet now verefied that was spoken, Ier. 19 11. I will breake this peo∣ple and this Citie, as one breaketh a potters vessell, that cannot be made whole againe, and make their ci∣tie as Tophet: and Mic. 3. 12. Zion shall be plow∣ed as a field, Ierusalem shall become heapes, and the house of the Lord, as the high places of the Forrest: The ruines thereof, Civitas eorum in aeternos ci∣neres collapsa est lib 4. cap. 19 in Ierem. in Dan. c. 9. saith Ierome, shall continue to the worlds end, the consummation of her de∣solation shall continue without any change, saith Theodoret: Indeed Aelius Adrianus the Empe∣rour built a citie neare to it, Arias Monta∣nus in Mic. cap. 3. which he called af∣ter his owne name Aelia, which since goes under the name of Ierusalem, Iosep. de bello Iud. cap 18. & 28. but hath neither the fashi∣on, nor scituation of it; but of it, saith Iosephus, the very foundations are laid so flat, as men would thinke there never had been habitation there. The first captivity of the Iewes after the Law, was that prophesied, Ier. 51. 7. Babylon hath beene a golden cup in the Lords hand, that made all the earth drunke with vengeance, which came upon them. Psal. 137. 1. By the waters of Babylon we sate downe and wept, &c. But they were surprised a∣gaine after the death of Christ, as being willing neither to beare the hard yoake of the Law, nor that of the Gospell which is easie, The Romanes bare the Ea∣gle in their Ensigne. Mat. 11. and a law of libertie, Iam. 2. 12. The Eagle in the Ro∣man Ensigne towred so high with incredible ma∣jestie, that it couched all the world under it, like lesser birds; and made them tributary to Caesar, to which this, whilome holy land of Iury, now stin∣king in her abominations, became a prey; and af∣ter many apparitions and voyces from hea∣ven, Iosephus de bel∣lo Iudai: lib. 4. 6. 3. &c. 7. from the East and West, and divers civill broyles within the wals, as if their owne hands had been made to be excoutioners of their rebel∣lious soules; famine making mothers eate their owne children, and these wombes that first gave them harbour, were made the places of their bu∣riall: then came the Pestilence, and laid them groveling by heapes gasping and gazing vpon the Temple, so lamentably and miserably, that Titus lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven, cal∣led God to witnesse, it was not his cruelty, but their impiety that had awaked God in venge∣ance, to bring the man upon the red horse, Rev. 5. 4. bloud and warre, and winged sword to flie in triumph among them; so many slaine, and so many taken prisoners, Euseh. Eccles. hist. lib. 4. c. 6. that thirty Iewes were sold for one penny, because among them, their Master was sold for thirty pence: Aelius Adrianus which built another Citie, would have reedified this, but could not; Sozom. lib. 5. c. 1. and Iulian, the Apostata thought in his blasphemous imagination to have built it, Ammi. Mar∣cel lib. 23. c. 1. as glorious as it was, to disprove CHRIST who had prophecied before of the utter dissipation of it; Socrat. lib. 3. c. 17. but he that sits in heaven laughed him to scorne, his workemen and worke were hindered by the falling of lime and sand, by the flashing of fire, and earthquakes, as if God had laid the curse of Ierico upon it, Iosh. 6. 26. Cursed be the man be∣fore the Lord that raiseth up and buildeth this Citie. So Ierusalem is like Reuben, Gen. 49. 2. The begin∣ning of Gods manly strength, but in the end was un∣stable as water, to forsake God, and so to be forsaken of him, and her dignitie is gone. So this matchlesse, Nine speciall priviledges of the Iewes. people, who had these nine most excellent priviledges, which all the world wanted, Rom. 9. 4. First, to be Israelites, Second∣ly, to whom pertained the Adoption; Thirdly, and the Glory; fourthly, and the Covenants; fift∣ly, and the giving of the Law; sixtly, and the ser∣vice of God; seventhly and the Promises; eightly, whose are the Fathers; ninthly, of whom came CHRIST according to the flesh; and which ad∣deth to their dignitie, the miracles of CHRIST, the immediate worke of his Godhead were wrought among them. Acts 10. 38. Hee went a∣bout, doing good, and healing all that were oppressed with the devill, for God was with him: yet all these are not able to sway with God, nor to keepe backe the point of his flaming sword, that was brandished over them for sinne, till it was shea∣thed in their destruction, and their foreheads branded with Caines marke, to wander dispersed upon the face of the earth, without King, without Prince, without Priest, without Image, without Ephod, and without Teraphim, as Israel afore∣time was threatned, Hos. 3. 4. and they now have felt, almost as long, as the first Age was before the Floud, Morn. du. Pless. de veritate Christ. relig. cap. 29. so scattered, and have so corrupted their owne Pedegrees, that at this day there is not a Iew in the world; which can say he hath his genealogie certaine, but are a scattered and con∣temptible Nation, throughout the whole earth. And not alone to instance in that now forsa∣ken nation; such is the weight and power of sinne, that after the plantation of the Gentiles, the Church of Rome a virgin, and the chaste, and faithfull spouse of CHRIST, their faith was re∣nownedly spoken of through the whole world, Apud vos solos incorrupta ser∣vatur patrum bereditas. Hier. ad Damas. Rom. Episcop. Rom. 1. 8. continuing stedfast in that doctrine by which she became the Church of CHRIST; but since when she became an uncleane filth; prosti∣tuted to all manner of fornications, embrued and drunken with the bloud, which she hath spilt, u∣surping upon the land-markes of Supremacy, ex∣alting her selfe above all that is called God, and is worshipped, 2 Thes. 2. 4. like the proud Lucifer, E∣say 14. 14. above the height of the cloudes; her hatefull ambition, cruelty, and abhominations hath caused God, even to spue her out of his mouth, to give her up to strong delusions, to be∣leeve lyes; and hath warned us, by an admonition of his owne Spirit, Reu. 18. 4. Come out of her my people. The old world so long as it continued in Gods service, and the sonnes of God had no commixture with the lascivious daughters of men, issuing from the murtherous loines of run∣nagate Cain, they stood sure as mount Sion, rest∣ing upon the brazen pillars of Gods love and fa∣vour,; but when once they mixed with the wic∣ked, and inordinately doated upon the face of skin-deepe beauty (see a miserable spectacle of Gods wrath) the cataracts and windowes of hea∣ven were opened, Niceph. lib. 1. c. 3. vide pecca∣ti horrendam paenam. Gen. 7. the floud of Gods anger prevailed against the multiplyed world, dispeo∣pled it, and brought those great multitudes to eight persons: where we see what it is to offend God; A fruitfull land maketh the barren for the sin of them that dwell therein, Psal. 107. 37. See the Church of Ephesus, Reu. 2. 2. a glorious Church; God with liking makes a remembrance of her graces, I know thy workes and thy labour and pati∣ence, and how thou canst not forbeare them that are evill &c. yet vers. 4. I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first love, thy pristine, ori∣ginall purity; thy zeale hath lost his ardor, and be∣come chilly and cold as Caucasus: and for this re∣lapse he threatens the confiscation of her Can∣dlesticke, the removing of his favours, as they have sufficiently proved in experience, remai∣ning under the most inhumane tyrant in the world, the Turke, in the most irreligious religi∣on, the licentious inventions of the Arabian Mahomet. Thus will the Lord deale with us for sinne, Amos 4. 12. and this is the bitter fruite that springs and sproutes from the cursed roote of this blacke and poysonous Hellebore: It cast the Angells from heaven, Omnium meo∣rum malorum causa peccatū est. Aug. de tempore. Adam out of Paradise, destroyed the old world, burned Sodome and Go∣morrha, and turned them to a sulphureous lake of stinking brimstone; cursed the earth, defileth the land, making Lebanon a Forrest, Sharon a wilder∣nesse, Carmel a desert: For sinne (mirabile dictu) God disclaimes and disavowes his owne crea∣ture, the worke of his owne hands, the frame of his owne wisedome, the care of his owne provi∣dence, whom he visites every morning. Math. 25 12. Verily I say unto you, I know you not. Misera∣bly wretched then is every wicked man, that hath by sinne so distamped the Image of God, and moulded himselfe into the similitude of Sa∣tan, that God will never take notice of such a metamorphosed changeling. And for sinne the creature groanes, desiring to be delivered and re∣nued, which shall shortly come to passe in the conflagration of this goodly and glorious archi∣tecture of the vaulted heavens, the spangled skies, and this strong pillared earth. And if we demaund a reason, why God so hateth sinne? it is, Deut. 32. 4. Reason 1. because of his owne purity, he is of pure eyes, Hab. 1. 13. and if he looke upon sinne, it is but as the pure eyed Sunne shines upon the nasty dung∣hill, and yet remaines pure; if he takes notice of it, he puts upon himselfe the person of a revenge∣ing Iudge, Heb. 13. last verse, a consuming-fire: cloathes himselfe with majesty and honour, puts off his roabes of Mercy, and puts on the bloudy garments of fury and anger, and glorifies him∣selfe in his Iustice. So odious is sinne, that God will not spare it in his most deerely beloved. The devill from a bright Angell of light, Non ob defectū creaturae, quia ipsa bona est, sed propter pec∣catum. Stella super Luc. c. 11 Hypothesis fac∣ta per impossi∣bile. is thrust downe to hell, not for any defect in the creature, for that is good, but for sinne. The priviledge of being mo∣ther to the worlds Saviour, would not have pleaded salvation for the blessed Virgin, if she had bin found in the power of sinne without faith and repentance. Nay, if it had bin found in the spotlesse humanity of our Saviour CHRIST himselfe, though the very Sonne and substance of his love; it had beene sufficient in the purity of his Iustice to have bound him for ever under the chaines of perpetuall darkenesse. The venemous poyson of the aspe, Plinius lib. nat. Hist. cap. 23. viper, basiliske, Amphisbena, having two heads, as if she were not hurtfull e∣nough to cast her poyson at one mouth onelie, yet they are never hurtfull to themselves: But sinne (as the Ivie embracing the Oake, till it have sucked up his sap, leaving him marrowlesse and dead, and which is an enemy to all plants, as Pli∣nie saith) destroyeth the subject in which it is nourished, Lib. 16, cap. 34. and viper-like devoureth the wombe wherein it was conceived. Iam. 1. 13. When lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sinne; and sinne when it is finished, bringeth forth death, the wages and guerdon thereof, Rom. 6. last verse. Reason 2. Reas. 2. because it is most repugnant, oppo∣site, contrary, As ens & non ens; summum bonum, & sum∣mum malum. and contradictory to the essence of God, and seekes to its utmost power, not onely to hurt, but even to destroy God, extol∣ling and exalting it selfe against him, 2 Cor. 10. 5. of which Iob 15. 26. speaking of the wicked man warring with God, Vide Thom. A∣quin. quest. 12. art. 21. & Ca∣ietan. super Thom. he runneth uppon him, even on his necke, upon the thicke bosses of his bucklers, as it were to push him with the hornes of his pride, Peltanus de sa∣tisfactione and prophanenesse; like the Iron hornes of Ze∣dekiah, 1 King. 22. 11. and to pull him downe from the throne of his eternall happinesse; Christi. cap. 11. citante Pineda super cap. 35. this is Giant-like, Iob. to wage battle with heaven. And yet with Nimrod, Gen. 11. thou buildest but the Babell of thine owne confusion: for who hath ever beene proud against God, and prospered? It is Elihu's Axiome in divinity, Iob. 35. 6. If thou sinnest, what dost thou against him? What canst thou do to the impassible God? but even as Caligula, Sueton in vita Caligulae. thunder against the true Iehovah, as he a∣gainst the fained Iove, till thou be destroyed with the loude and cloud-rending clappes of true Thunder, Ier. 14. 26. I will powre their wickednesse upon them. So we see how hatefull sinne is to God, and that for it he will plucke off, even the branches, whom he loves so dearely. Though we stood in his favour, as Zorobabell, the signet upon his finger, as Iedidia, his beloved; yet if we sinne, he will chasten us; and if we continue in it, he will damne us, he will deprive us of his word, his worship, and then bring on the maine Ocean of his anger, la sephus. as he did to the Iewes, when the Chri∣stians were remooved from them to Pella; and make us feele and know that he is not bound to any people or place, but sinne breaks the leagues were it as rong as the three fold cord of Salo∣mon, as unlooseable as the Gordian knot. And so much for the Doctrine, the Vses follow. Seeing then, Ʋse, 1 that when the Iewes fell away from God, he had the Centiles in store to graffe in their stead, and the arme of the Lord is not shortened; When any one people will not bring forth the fruite of the Gospell, but abuse it, he will take it away, and bestowe it elsewhere, it serves to caveat: First, the Minister: Secondly, the whole body of the people: Thirdly, every particular person. First then, For the Mini∣ster. to thee that ministrest at the Altar and waitest upon the holy things of God, 1 Cor. 9. 5. that art set in the place of that good and faithfull steward, which should distribute to e∣very one his portion in due season; that messen∣ger interpreter, one of a thousand, that must de∣clare unto man his righteousnesse, and deliver him that he goe not downe into the pit, Iob. 33. 23. If thou decay in love to God, to his word, to thy brethren, if thou lie in any knowne sinne, and grosse impiety, it is a meanes to deprive thee either of thy gifts, or of thy calling, as was done to Iudas, when he was found a traytor in his A∣postleship, he was remooved, and the price of bloud required at his hands, and Matthias ap∣poynted in his place, Ier. 15. 19. Acts 1. 26. When Ieremie failed in delivering the Lords message to the people, either for feare or impetience, the Lord himselfe becomes a Prophet unto him. If thou returne, I will bring thee againe, and thou such stand before mee; and if thou take the previous from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth: Where he is gi∣ven to understand, that if he continued in negli∣gence, he should cease to be a Prophet unto God, which will be sanctified of all, but especially of such as carry the vessels of the Sanct ary, and goe before the aske. The Kindome of Assyria, E∣say 13. 3. is said to be sanctified for Gods anger, in the destruction of his enemies. If then there be a kind of sanctification for the worke of de∣struction, then much more for that great and glorious worke of edification in Gods Church. Levit. 10. 3 When Nadab and Abihu had broken the com∣mandement of God in offering strange fire, Mo∣ses to satisfie Aaron, tells him that the Lord will be sanctified of all them that come before him. God hath given man two hands, not to build with the one, and pull downe with the other, but to buld with both. Take heede then of falling a∣way with Demias, least by thy decay in love to religion, thou pull downe the Church of God; and 1 Cor. 3. 17. If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy, for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are. If then he spared not the sa∣crilegious prophaners of his earthly temple, as in Balthazar, Dan. 5. 1. Helidorous, 2 Mac. 3. 15. and that notorious rob-Church Dionysins; but brought them to fearefull ends: Much lesse will be spare the prophaners of his spirituall Tem∣ple; but for thy wickednesse will in fatuate thy gifts, remove thy calling from thee, or thee from it, as he did the king dome from Saul, and gave it to another, or as he dealt with those ingratefull Iowee. The world is a Spirituall spittle, and in the Church are some languishing in a consump∣tion, some sicke unto death in a spirituall leprosy; some slumbring in a deepe security, in imminent danger, yet not perceiving it, as the drunkard, Prov. Plin. lib. 21. cap. 31. & lib. 29. cap. 4. 23. 34. sleeping upon the toppe of a mast; or poysoned with Aspes, which causeth death sleeping, or with the roote Halicacobus: Some wanting a Cordiall, and others a Corrasive; some Moses to launce them, and others CHRIST to heale them; some a sound from Sinai, others a song from Sio ; some the r d of Moses, others the pot of Mauna. Now the Minister here is sent to play the part of a Physitian or Chirur∣gian, as CHRIST himselfe Esay 61. 1. To heale the broken hearted. Ezech. 34. 16. the office of a Pa∣stor, to seek that which was lost, to bring againe that which was driven away, to binde up that which was broken, and to strengthen that which was weake; or as Eliphea, testifies of Iob. chap. 40 3. He strengthened the weake hands and fee ble knees. CHRIST commends the halfe. dead traveller to the Minister, as to an hoste, to cure his wounds, and to care for his pro∣mise provision, Luke 10. 34. Now if the Physitian himselfe be sicke, how can he cure the disease? How can he heale the plague-soares of firme, that hath the boyle of the same pestilence raging in himselfe? First then cure and: heale thy selfe, cast the beames out of thine owne eyes, least God deale with thee, as he did to the Minister of E∣phesus, Revel. 2. 5. confiscate thy Candlesticke, and take away thy graces, and leave thee bare and barren. Therefore be carefull to admonish them that are unruly, comfort the feeble min∣ded, support the weake, be patient toward all men, 1 Thess. 5. 14. The second is concerning the whole body politick and Ecclesiasticall, For the whole body of a Church or Common∣wealth. both for the Church and common wealth. If the people decay in love to the Word, to Religion, to holinesse and god∣linesse, as sometime backsliding Israel did; Esay 1. 6. From the sole of the foote to the crowne of the head, there is no foundnesse, but soares, wounde, and putrifying bruises: and live in drunkennesse, pro∣phanenesse, atheisme, infidelity, and contempt of God; this will procure the removeall of the Go∣spell, and of all Religion, Hos. 9. 7. The prophet is a foole, and the man of the spirit is mad; This is a fearefull judgement; and if, we aske the cause, it is for the multitude of thine iniquitie, and the great hatred; for the sinne of the whole Church God doth send unsanctified, foolish, ignorant, and wicked Ministers, Ierem. 5. 13. For the backe∣sliding Apostacie of Israel, the Prophets shall become winde, and the Word is not in them, Ierem. 14. 14. They prophecie lies in Gods Name. Thus doth God give up men to strong delusions to beleeve lies, because they love not the truth, 2 Thess. 2. 13. Thy sins, and the sinnes of the Church withhold good things from thee, Ier. 5. 25. even to take away from thee his Word, as he did the Arke which was the glory of Israel, 1 Sam. 4. 22. Heare this then ye prophaners of Gods Name, contemners of his Word, and yee backesliding Apostates that have turned your Religion into policie, your zeale into luke-warnenesse, like Ephraim, a cake not turned, Hos. 7. 8. that have a knee for God, and a knee for Rimmon, 2 King. 5. 18. halting betwixt two opinions, 1 Kings 18. 21. that can hold the Religion stamped with the Image of the most High, and yet mixe it with the paintings and false complexions of the purple Harlot the Whore of Babylon. Philip. Came∣rac. in operibus successivis. It is recorded of a certaine Soldan, which died at the Siege of Zigetum, who being perswaded by the Muphti a Bishop or Patriarke among the Mahumetan Turkes, not to suffer so many Religions, as were in his Do∣minions: He answered, that a Nosegay made of divers flowers was the sweeter; which may be true in a Posie, because they may be all flowers; but in Religion they must be all weedes, and he∣resies, tares, and the conceits of men, except one∣ly the flower, Euseb. Eccles. which is the truth But there is no communion with CHRIST and Beliall, Hist. lib. 3. cap. 22. with the truth and falshood, with God and Baal, with the Gospell and Popery. Saint John could not en∣dure to be in the bathe with Cerinthus; Ieromes pen was like a lance charged against Vigilantius, Iovinian, and others; and Augustine spake in his disputations against the Donatists, and Manichces, Arians, and Pelagians, hotte coales of Iuniper, words armed with aequa fortis, steeped in vine∣gar, and could not endure Idolatry while he reigned. If wee rent then the seamelesse coate of CHRIST, and become luke-warme Laodiceans, Reu. 3. 17. God will spe e vs out of his mouth, ab∣horre us as a thing that is rawe. What ought wee to doe then, that have by our continuall rebelli∣ons, und wicked backslidings even moved to anger the Holy one of Israel? but humble our selves in repentance, that God in tender com∣passion may remove our judgements, and con∣tinue his Gospell, the lanthorne and light of his word, the marke and character of his love a∣mong us, as he hath promised, Ier. 18. 8. If that nation against whom I have pronounced, turne from their evill, I will repent of the evill which I thought to doe unto them. Thirdly, For everie par∣ticular person. concerning every particular and pri∣vate person: If any man or woman decay in love, or want love to God or their brethren, and the practising of holy duties, growe sicke of a lazie lethargie, or lye in any grosse sinne, in the know∣ledge of his owne conscience; it is a meanes to remove the Candlesticke from him in a fearefull deprivation of his knowledge, and the other gra∣ces of God in him. The affection of love in the heart is like the watch of a clock; if it stand, the wheeles stand, and as it goeth fast or slowely, the wheeles goe answerably: Even so it is in man, if his love to God and to his Gospell encrease, so doth his knowledge, and other giftes multiply; but if love be gone, then with Demas he gives a vale∣diction and farewell to all Religion and piety, his vertues are in the, waine, if not in a full Eclipse; And so we see a reason of the palpable ignorance in so many of our people, that have had both Paul to plant and Apolios to water; that have had the North and the South to blow upon their gardens, have heard the Gospell plainely and powerfully preached, the yeare of Iubile proclai∣med by the sonnes of thunder; and yet are like the deafe Adder, that stoppeth her eares, some with the foote of their pride, some of covetous∣nesse, &c. which is nothing but the want of love. Heb. 3. 12. Take heed least there be in any of you an evill heart of unbeliefe in departing from the living God, but exhort one another daily while it is called to day, least any of you he heardned through the deceitfulnesse of sinne. Wherein is shewed the way and the degrees by which a man falls from God. Suggestio First, sinne deceives him by drawing him to commit it; Actio then followes an accustomed continuance in it, Habitus and finally unbelief, in many poynts of religion; Impenitentia. impenitency, and apostati∣call falling away and opposing the trueth, as Hi∣erom, Hugo Cardinalis, and divers others, have marshalled sinne in it's severall rankes, and de∣grees. Seeing then wee are fallen into the last and worst times, in which the love of most men waxeth cold, and are cast into the declining age of the decrepit world, wherein the Practise of Pietie, which was printed in the dayes of the Pa∣triarches, and Primitive times in a largs Folie, is now contracted into a volume lesse than a Trice∣sim quarto, O tempora, O mores! And among whom (besides the fruitfull spawne of innu∣merable enormities, which are of a late Edition, molded and framed in the corrupt heart of man, assisted by the politique malice of Satan) as many sinnes rule and reigne, as ever did in the times of those despised Iewes: Have we not those cardinall and crying sinnes, which cry as loud as thunder for vengeance, which are comprised in this briefe Disticke, Clamitat in coelum vox sanguinis & Sodomorum, Gen. 4. 10. Vox oppressorum-merces retenta laborum. Gen. 18. 21. Wages detained, Exod. 3. 9. doth for vengeance cry, Murther, Iam. 5. 4. oppression, lustfull Sodomie. And besides, Bellua multo∣rum capitum. have we not sprung and sprou∣ted up among us those severall heads of that cur∣sed Hydra, those foule birds of that uncleane Covie, contempt of the Ministery, Irreligion, Prophanenesse, Pride, Sabboth-breaking, Igno∣rance, Superstition, Covetousnesse, &c. all which are daily mustered in armes against us: And were it not the longanimitie, and long suffering of that Iehova, which in judgement remembreth mercie, had long ere this time removed our Can∣dlestick and crowne from among us. Let us then follow the counsell of the Prophet Amos, Chap. 4. 12. Because I will doe thus and thus unto thee, O Israel, prepare to meete thy God. Every man and woman prepare with the Ninivites to meet your God by repentance, and sorrow for sinne: As every one hath had an high hand in sinning; so let us have a heavy heart in repenting, that wee may prevent his judgements, answere his Word, and agree with God (which by reason of our sinnes is become our adversary) quickly while we are in the way to the Iudges house, lest he de∣liver us to the Iaylor, and so we be cast into pri∣son to pay the uttermost farthing of our debt. Seeing Israel which was the roote, Ʋse. 2. nay rather as a naturall branch sprung from the fatnesse of the true Olive; yet for her relapse from her goodnesse (as it was threatned to the Church of Philadelphia, Revel. 3. 11.) another receives their crowne and dignitie: Learne hence then Gentile which art grafted in, not to be high-minded, but feare: for if God in the puritie of his justice, spa∣red not the naturall branches, but plucked them off, take heed least he spare not thee, Rom. 11. 21. If thou now enjoyest the Gospell, the Word, and Sacraments, plentie and peace, and growest secure and wanton, like an untamed Calfe, Ierem. 19. 31. and castest off the yoake of obedi∣ence, behaving thy selfe unthankfully and wic∣kedly; the wofull curse of Corazin and Bethsai∣da hangs over thy head, and it shall be easier for Sodome and Gomorrha in the day of Iudgement than for thee, Matth. 11. 21. &c. Let these rebellious Iewes be a warning for thee, as Moses, Deut. 24. 9. warnes the people in calling to remembrance the example of Miriam, strucke with a leprosie, Re∣member what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam by the way; or as the mention made of the theft of Achan, Ios. 22. 20. or as the destruction of So∣dome and Gomorrha is brought upon the stage for a token of Gods wrath, Deut. 29. 33. or as the ex∣ample of Egypt and Pharao to the Philistines, 1 Sam. 6. 6. or as the Apostle uses the example of the idolatrous fathers by way of exhortation to his backsliding Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10. 11. shut∣ting it up in this admonition, All these things hap∣ned unto them for examples, and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come: and by the example of Eva seduced by the Serpent, 2 Cor. 11. 3. Let him therefore that standeth, Phil. 2. 12. take heede lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12. where∣by is given us to understand, Cum timore & tremore, ne sibi tribuendo, quòd benè ope∣rantur, de bonis suis gloriantur operibus. Aug. de gratia. that outward stan∣ding and professing of the faith without inward grace, and the feare of God, issuing out of a god∣ly conversation, is not standing indeed, but see∣ming to stand. Take heed then to make thine ele∣ction sure, for though salvation belong to all, yet all pertaine not to it. Esay 60. 2. Darkenesse shall cover the earth, and grosse darkenesse the people, but the Lord shall arise vpon thee. Ioh. 1. 9. Christ is the light of the world, and came to lighten every one that commeth into the world, but every one comes not to him to be illuminated. Micha, chapter 7. verses 1, 2. complaines, that he (speaking in the name of the whole people) was as the Summer gatherings, and as the grapes of the Vintage; there is no cluster to eate, like the gleaning of an Har∣vest, heere an eare and there an eare. So then, Christian, if thou wilt not be cut off, be willing to be drawne from darknesse to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that thou mayest re∣ceive forgivenesse of sinnes, nd inheritance among them which are sanctified, Acts 26. 18. True faith is afraid to fall, and therefore striveth by all meanes to shunne the rockes and shelves of secu∣ritie, and is farre from rejoycing in any outward estate, without the correspondence of obedience. As a man upon a high Tower, is afraid to fall, though he be safely environed with battlements; So thou Gentile, though now thou bee in grace, and under the protection of the most High, take heed to thy standing, lest in the midst of thy peace, the evill one come and sow tares in thy harvest, steale away thy graces, and leave thee to be cast off with the Iew; the certainty of thy standing is in the performance of thy obedience. If yee will hearken and obey, yee shall eate the good things of the land. But for our further instruction, Vse. 3. let us make a Quaere with the Apostle, Rom. 11. 1. Hath God cast away his people? God forbid, for salvation is of the Iewes, Ioh. 4. 22. The royall stocke of Sem are but like Philemons unprofitable servant, departed for a season, that they may be received for ever: If the casting them off be the reeonciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them be but life from the dead? Rom. 11. 15. Though they be now in the depth of Infidelity and obstinacy, yet before the consummation of the world they shall beleeve the Messiah, as the Prophets have prophecied, and the Pen-men and Notaries of the holy Ghost have testified, they shall be Choristers of Gods praise. Gregory the Great, Super Cant. 6. 13. is also of opinion, that in the often and earnest calling of the Shulamite, Cant. 6. 13. which signified the people of Ierusalem, so called of Shalem, peace; is clearely intimated a prophecie of the finall vocation of the Iewes, which have beene so long forsaken: as also it is evident by eight Reasons alleadged by the Apo∣stle to this purpose. The first being drawen from the end of their rejection, Rom. 11. which was not to their utter perishing in unbeleife, but seeing the calling of the Gentiles they might be provoked to emulation, God ap∣pointing their fall and rejection not simply, but for the end which is good; else it were against the divine goodnesse of God, which never suf∣fers, as Augustine saith, August. in En∣chirid. any evill to be done, but to bring good out of it. Second, argument is drawen from the lesser to the greater, If their fall be riches to the world, much more shall their reconciliation be life from the dead: Thirdly, from the condition of the Patriarch Abraham, If the first fruites be holy, so it the lumpe, if the roote be holy, so are the branches; but they are, 1 Pet. 2. 9. A chosen generation, a roy∣all Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; which is not meant of an actuall holinesse, Aquin super Rom. 11. which was in them, but that they shall be restored to the holinesse of theyr Fathers. Fourthly, from Gods omnipotencie, who is able to restore them againe, as a man to awake out of his sleepe; if he be able to raise the dead, and give sight to the blind, which are miraculous workes above the course of nature; then much more to restore them, which is but a replanta∣tion and grafting in, a worke of nature. So that fiftly, according to likelyhood, If God engrafted the wilde olive contrary to na∣ture, how much more shall the naturall bran∣ches be regrafted into their owne place? Sixtly, from the prophecies of Esay chap. 59. There shall come out of Zion the deliverer, and shall turne away ungodlines from Iacob: & the testimony of Ieremie, which are the Prophets of God, and have prophecyed of their Conversion. Seventhly, from a distinction concerning the Gospell, They are enemies for their sakes, but as touching election, they are beloved for their fathers sake. Eightly, from a proportion; As you Gentiles were sometimes in unbeliefe, without God in the world, Eph. 2. and by mercy are now called; so shall they obtaine mercy to come out of their Cimmerian blindnesse of unbeliefe; so shall yee both be ioyned in the unity of faith, building up the temple of God, perfecting his house, joyntly singing unto God your Hallelujahs praise and thanksgiving. It must teach us then the precept and the pra∣ctice of the Apostle of the Gentiles, Rom. 11. 14. By all meanes to provoke them to emulation, that they may be saved; as that speach of Moses, Deut. 32. 21. is applyed to us Gentiles, Who have found him whom we sought not after, Esay 65. 1. That they are beloved for their fathers sake, honoured with the humanity of CHRIST, Rom. 9. 5. for whose salvation theyr Paul was so zealous, as for their good, he wished himselfe separated from CHRIST. Ought not we then, which are by grace made partakers of the same roote, to feede their dead branches with our living sap, by ope∣ning unto them that IESVS, and worlds Saviour, whose sides they pierced, Zach. 12. 10. and which was the substance of all their sacrifices? Was he not shewed in the old Testament in the Angell, Exod. 23. 20. in Aaron, Exod. 28. 4. in the scepter, Gen. 49. 10. in the brazen serpent, Num. 21. 9. in the scape-goate, Levit. 16. 21. in Balaams starre, Num. 24. 17. &c. Was he not seene in the new Testament in his humanity, doctrine, miracles, and death, all of them (like the finger in a Diall) pointing with Iohn Baptists Ecce, Iohn 1. 29, at the Messiah, agree∣ing in his parentage, person, and place of his birth? as the wings of the Cherubins, which touched each other upon the Mercy-seate, 1 Kings 6. 27. the one confirming the others af∣firmation, his infancie answering the Types; hee was seene a Starre by the Gentile Prophet, and found by a starre of the Gentiles, Matth. 2. 10. in Rama was weeping, as Ieremie had heard, Ier. 31. 15. out of Egypt he was called, Hos. 11. 1. and was brought up in Nazareth, as was prophecied. His Life was unreprooveable, the Prince of this world could find nothing amisse, Ioh. 14. 30. his Miracles sufficiently testifying his Godhead, that even his adversaries confessed it; his Death as effectually acted, as it was foretold, Zach. 13. 7. I saw the Shepheard the Lords fellow smitten, and the sheepe scattered, his being prized and sould for thirty peeces of silver, Zach. 11. 12. The purchase of the Potters field, the piercing his hands and feet, the dividing of his garments, &c. Two and thir∣ty of which we may see in Matthew, and all ful∣filled: and we may even briefely gather all into one, and let it be him, against whom they cannot, they dare not except, their owne Prophet Esay of their blood-royall, Chap. 53. wherein the Iew may plainely see that our Evangelists have recor∣ded nothing but what was foretold, and to whom can this be applyed but to IESVS whom yee crucified? even his death was acted without the gate as the Bullocke was burnt without the Campe, Levit. 6. 12. And further, the remooving the Scepter from Iudah, Ioseph. antiq. Iudaic. li. 14. cap. 26. which came to passe at the Idumean Herod, entring to the Kingdome by the favour and fur∣therance of Antonius, and afterward more strong∣ly seated and setled by Augustus, when he cruelly slaughtered their Sanhedrim, Cap. Sanhe∣drim. as Philo their ow Countreyman doth witnesse; and their ow Rabbins in their Talmud cry out, Wee unto us, for the Scepter is now taken away from Iudah, and the Lawgiver from betweene his feet. This might also be shewed by the generall ceasing of the Iewish Sacrifices, the multitudes of Hecatombes among the Gentiles, which all gave place and died with the great Heathenish Pan, when this immaculate Lambe was slaine; Also by the ending of the yeare of Iubile, with Christ himselfe upon the Crosse proclaimed to be ended, Ioh. 19. 30. It is finished: the ending of the Monarchies propheci∣ed by Daniel, which should have their full Period when the Stone should be cut out of the mountaine without hands; which ended in that lascivious Egyptian Queene, Cleopatra, all being brought under the yoke and subjection of the Romane: their owne Simeon, in whom they say the spirit of the great Sinagogue did cease; hee testifieth, Luke 2. 26, 27, &c. Also, their owne Prophetesse, Anna of the tribe of Asher, Luke 2. De Civitate Dei lib. 18. cap. 23. 38. Also, the ancient Sibyls as that Erithraea, which spake so excellently of CHRIST, that she seemes to Saint Augustine to have beene a Citi∣zen of the Citie of God, Corn. Tacitus Annal. lib. 6. cap. 3. which bookes were had in that reverend esteeme, that when Augustus Caesar, searching up their ancient Prophecies throughout Africa, Sicilia, and the Colonies of Italie to be brought to Rome, to examine the true from the false: Suet. in vita Augustis cap. 31. He caused 2000. to be devoured by fire, yet he preserved the Zibillian Oracles and caused them to be locked up into golden chests at the foot of the Image of Apollo in mount Pallatine in Rome; but these are copiously handled by that Hammer of the Iewes and Mahumetanes, De veritate Christianae Religionis. Philip Morney, Lord of Plesse and others. Thus must we provoke the seed of holy Sem to embrace the Gospell, by shewing them; that it is in vaine to expect any other to come in great power, but that great mystery is already made knowne, which is, God manifested in the flesh, iustified in the Spirit, seene of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, &c. according to the Scriptures. 1 Tim. 2. 16. That they may acknowledge Davids sonne, and Davids Lord, whom they must kisse in obedi∣ence, or perish everlastingly. Heare then yee sonnes of the Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made unto our Fa∣thers, Acts 3. 25. Heare I say, the kingly David, sweet singer of Israel, calling you forth of your blindnesse, to joyne with the Gentile to praise God in this Hallelu-jah, you must be one in the bond of the Spirit, and the unity of peace; be no more the deafe Adder that stoppeth their eares though the Charmer charme never so wisely, Psal. 58. 4. This is the CHRIST whose blood hath beene so long required at your hands, Matth. 27. 25. An∣swere not with your elders, Mar. 11. 33. Wee can∣not tell, you have had both your Patriarks, and your Prophets pointing at him, the Vale of the Temple is rent and now you have vs Gentiles to preach him unto you, Luke 23. Heb. 9. The Lord therefore, for his CHRISTS sake, the sonne of his love, and the ingraven Image of his Person, remoove the vaile from your hearts that with us you may have your eyes opened to see the way into the holy or holies, made open by the great High Priest of our Calling, that you may come at the found of this silver Trumpet of your owne David; that as your diminishing hath beene the riches of the world, so your resto∣ring may be life from the dead, and that it may be in due time accomplished and performed, we shall daily powre out our prayers in the name of IESVS CHRIST, to the Father by the blessed Spirit, to which three glori∣ous Persons, and but one onely wise God, be all honour and glory for evermore. Amen. Here endeth the first part, being verse 1. VERSE, II. PSAL. 117. 2. For his mercifull kindnesse is great toward us: and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever. Praise yee the Lord. T He tres-noble branch of Iesse king David, having by a propheticall spirit, not onely summo∣ned but enjoyned both Iewes and Gen∣tiles to the joynt∣praising of God, de∣claring the bound∣lesse compasse, and unlimited circuit of the king∣dome of CHRIST, not onely King of the Iewes as Pilate stiled him, Iohn 19. 19. but even the hea∣then are his inheritance, linked into the society of faithfull Abraham, by the bond of faith and obedience, elsewhere, as Psal. 19. 1. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament sheweth his handy worke, &c. Omnes Creatu∣rae Deum suum esse clamant opificem. Calv. super locum. Even insensible creatures, as Sunne, Moone, Starres, Meteors, Thunder, Haile, Snow; &c, Psal. 148. are called upon for the per∣formance of this dutie, every creature be it never so base in the sight of Man, bearing upon it the workemanship of his hands, even by silence loud∣ly proclaimes it's Maker; but he is praised of Man in a more lively and louder straine, a shriller and sweeter Diapason, sounding from an heaven-sprung soule, which in the internall, externall, su∣periour, and inferior powers and faculties there∣of, doth manifestly beare the Image of God, and the characteristicall badge and stampe of the Divinitie, as Calvin saith, is invested and inriched with such a measure and furnishment of Graces as it pleaseth the Olimpian love to distribute to every one, Certa infignia divinitatis in homine. Calv. as Homer in the twylight of nature could say, the ditty of whose duty, in this vers. 2. is composed of Gods mercy and truth: li. 1. instit. cap. 5. § 5. and so this brings us to the reason, . Hom. Odyss. 6. for his mercifull kind∣nesse, &c. In which are considerable 1. His Mercie. 2. His Trueth in performing his promises. 3. The certainty of both confir∣med in the object toward us. 4. The Epiphonema and conclu∣sion of this Psalme, which is accounted the last of the Iewes Hallelu-jahs, which were appointed to be sung at their Passeover, ending in the same cadence in which it begun: Praise yee the Lord. Mercifull kindnesse, First Motive. the first motive injoy∣ning the dutie, is a common place, in which, as in a Maze or Labyrinth, we may loose our selves and make an easie entrance but no end, for all the wayes of God are mercie and truth, Psal. 25. 9. The Almighty hath stepped no where beneath or a∣bove the circle of the Moone, but he hath left plaine prints and characters of his mercies, that he that runnes may reade them, and that we may take notice of the tendernesse of them; sometime they are expressed in the love of Parents to Chil∣dren, Psal 103. 13. As a father pittieth his chil∣dren, so doth the Lord pitty them that fear him; sometime in the love of Eagles to their young, Is. 49. even exceeding the love of a woman to her sucking child, verse 15. hee hath engraven us up∣on the palmes of his hands, verse 16. sometime in the tendernesse of hennes to their Chickens, Mat. 23. 37. which how tender it is, we see in the continuall care that she hath in hatching, feeding, and (to her power) in defending her young; and yet all these are but shadowes, God is not subject to any attending pro∣perties. in regard of substantiall and everlasting love, which CHRIST IESVS the heavenly Henne hath over his beloved ones: Quicquid in Deo est, Deus est, cum fis mi∣sericors, quid es nisi ipsa mi∣sericordia. his love is as himselfe infinite, for whatso∣ever is in God, is God, his mercy, his justice, &c. and all those backe-parts of the mighty IEHO∣VAH, Exod. 34. 6. When he is called mercifull what is he, but mercy it selfe in the abstract, saith Savanorola, if they were al gathered together that are in heaven and earth, and it be demaunded of them how they have been saved, they all stand as a cloud of witnesses to testifie Gods free mercies, Quot iusti, tot sunt miseratio∣nes. and to say with the Church, Psal. 115. 1. Not un∣to us, O Lord not unto us, but unto thy Name give the praise. Mercies two-fold. Now consider further that the mercifull kind∣nesse of God is 1. Generall. 2. Speciall. The generall, is his providentiall care over all his creatures, in creating, preserving, sustaining, and maintaining of them, Psal. 36. 6. Thou, O Lord, wilt save both man and beast, Mat. 5. 45. He maketh the Sunne to rise on the evill and the good, and sen∣deth raine upon the just and unjust, Iohn 5. 17. My Father yet worketh, and I worke with him, meaning in his generall care in the supporting of the crea∣ture, this is called, Psalme 51. 1. Loving kindnesse or benignity extending it selfe to the very Ra∣vens, Psal. 147. 9. Luke 12. 24. The speciall mercy is that, by which hee loves his owne in CHRIST, redeemes, sanctifies, and saves them by his free grace, 1 Tim. 4. 10. He is the Saviour of all men, especially of those that beleeve, this he exerciseth toward us, both in giving and forgiving, both which Moses describes at large, Exod. 34. 6. Mercifull, in which he doth as it were clothe himselfe in the affections of man. Ier. 31. 10. His bowels are troubled for Ephraim, Matth. 9. 36. His bowels even earned in compassion, to see the multitude wandring as sheepe without a shepheard, how pathetically he perswades the reformation of his Church, Cant. 6. 7. Returne, returne, O Shu∣ mite returne, how passionately he deplores Ieru∣salem, Luke 19. 42. If thou haddest knowne even thou in this thy day, the things which belong to thy peace, in a word he rejoyceth in his owne mercie, Gaudet in mi∣sericordia sua, dolet de mise∣ria nostra. but sorrowes for our miserie. Gracious, which intimates a forwardnesse to doe us good, he is never weary in doing it, Iam. 1. 5. he gives liberally to all. Slow to anger, full of patience, Gen. 6. 3. How long did he wait the repentance of the old world, in his mercy stopping the course of his deserved vengeance, Psal. 95. 10. Fourty yeares long did he suffer the murmuring Idolators, and Adulterers in the wildernesse, Psal. 106. 43. Many a time did they provoke him to anger by their Counsels, & yet, Is. 30. 18. he waits that he may have mercie. Aboundant in good∣nesse and truth, noting his disposition by kind∣nesse to win men, & the immutable constancie of his promises, & w ch is the inexhaustible fountain of his mercies, he reserves them for thousands, his goodnes is not like the morning dew dispier∣ced and exhaled by the Sunne, nor like the Cof∣fers of the greatest Potentate, which may be drawen dry, but a Lamp which is fed by the oyle of Immortalitie, and which makes up the mea∣sure, he forgives iniquity, transgression, and sinne, no marvell than, if David call them (in his expe∣rience) the multitude of his tender compassions; in w ch , he tenderly embowelleth his chosen, as the womb enfoldeth & nourisheth the new conceived Embryo, where he shewes mercies he shewes them by multitudes; & if the royall heart of Alexander thought it not honourable to give small things; how much more than, shall the all-sufficient God give; that exceeds him as much as the maine O∣cean the least riveret, he is ready to forgive, Isa. 55. 7. Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 3. Very pittifull and full of mercy, Iam. 5. 11. The heighth, length, bredth, and depth thereof, passeth all understanding, Eph. 3. 18. All these compassions and mercifull kindnesses may be reduced to a sixe-fold ranke. Sixe rankes of Mercies. First, preventing Mercies whereby hee did us good when we knew not, keeping us from many sins w ch otherwise we had committed many and many have we cōmitted against him, but far more should we have done, Agnosce gra∣tiam ejus, cui debes etiam quod non ad∣misisti. Aug. if his mercie had not pre∣vented us; acknowledg than Gods mercy toward thee, even in those sins w ch thou hast not cōmit∣ted. If thou seest one w ch is debtor to me for a sin, and I forgave him, know also that thou art a deb∣tor to me, because I prevented thee from the like; because there is in every mans corrupted brest, since the fall of Adam, the Seminarie and seed-plot of all iniquitie, springing from the bitter root of that originall Corruption, the match and tinder, the fuell and fountaine of every actuall transgres∣on, O quanta dig∣natio pietatis, fic ingratum gratia conser∣vare. In Evang. 7. panum ser. 1. so that there is no enormitie which the most debauched wretch hath committed, but thou hadst acted the like if grace had not preuented, boast not thy selfe then in this, but with devoute Bernard extoll the mercie of the Almighty. Secondly, are his sparing mercies, experienced in his longanimitie and patience, in which thou mayest say, I have sinned, and thou heldest thy tongue, I have transgressed, and thou hast spared me; when thou lookedst upon Zimri and Cosbi slaine in the act of uncleannesse, Ananias and Sa∣phira, the old world, Sodome and Gomorrha, Iulian, Herod, with thousands more, the dierfull specta∣cles of Gods powerfull Iustice; hast thou not sufficient cause to glorifie that God, that hath so long suffered thee to wallow in the puddles of thine iniquitie, and hath not sunke thee downe to the pit of perdition, but still waites that hee may have mercie. Thirdly, his pardoning mercies, else what be∣nefit were it to be long spared, Quo diutius ex∣pectat eo di∣scrictius judi∣cabit. and at last paid home as it shall be with every impenitent, though he enjoy the sun-shine of Gods patience, yet in the end the wrath of God shall burne as an Oven, as Tophet against him; though now he see the hand of Gods justice behind his backe, clouded and vailed in his daily continued mercies; Quod defertur non aufertur. yet the conclusion will prove a tragicall Catastrophe, though he passe with a slow pace, yet he goes in order, . Basil. though with leaden feet, yet with Iron hands, but this feare is taken away by these par∣doning mercies, by which in the bloud of Christ he makes us as cleane as if he never had been po∣luted, Psal. 32. 1. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputeth no sinne. Fourthly, are his renuing mercies, by which he gives not onely remission of sinnes, but also the grace of renovation, by which they become new creatures, trees of righteousnesse bearing and a∣bounding in the fruits of faith and repentance, sanctified in their soules; bodies and spirits, not like the blacke Apostata, who after his cleansing is repossessed with seven spirits worse then the former, or the Dog returning to his vomit, or the Sowe to wallow in her myre, and which is more fully made plaine in the fifth, Adam potuit non mori, nos non possumus mori. Aug. which are his corroborating mercies; whereby hee conti∣nues in the state of grace, not falling and back∣sliding with Adam in the state of mutabilitie, but as mercy brought him to it, so it continueth and keepeth him in it. Sixtly and lastly, are his crowning mercies whereby he shall perfect his worke begun in us, and performe his Kingdome promised to us, where there shall be no hurtfull thing, but wee estated in the paradise of eternall happinesse, shall have our Vnion and Communion with Christ and the heavenly Hierarchie of the high and holy Saints for ever, such a measure of Beatitude, Isa. 64 4. As eye hath not seene, nor eare heard, nei∣ther hath entred into the heart of man, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Ʋse. 1. This unmeasurable extent of Gods mercies serves first to urge upon us the drift of the Pro∣phet in this place, viz. To praise God for his mercy, the whole worke of our salvation goes under this Title, 1 Pet. 2. 10. Which in time past were not the people of God, but are now the people of God, which had not obtained mercie, but now have obtained mercie; to what part soever we looke, the whole frame of it is made of mercy, if wee begin at Gods election, the foundation and ground-worke of all, and passe downe to the last period of all, which is glorification, and aske from what roote each part sprung, this onely Mercie must answer all; Mercie in chusing mer∣cie, in sending CHRIST, in calling, justifying, san∣ctifying, strengthening, preventing, preserving, and the admitting of us to an Inheritance im∣mortall and undefiled, 1 Pet. 1. 4. all from mercy, so that the burden of our song must still be with David, Psal. 132. 1. For his mercie endureth for ever. In the parable of the profuse prodigals re∣turne, the whole streame of his Fathers carriage toward him, is nothing but mercy, when he was yet a farre off, his father saw him, had compassi∣on on him, ranne to meete him, fell on his necke, kissed him, &c. In the whole worke, there is no∣thing but mercie, Luke 15. 20. &c. So that light and darkenesse, God and the Devill, hot and cold, and not in a line of greater opposition then mer∣cie and merit in the worke of mans salvation, which Antichristian Doctrine is like a Centaure halfe man, halfe horse, or like that brood of Ni∣lus, halfe frog, halfe earth, or the minotaure, halfe bull, halfe man, contraries in a remisse degree may admit intention and remission, opera requirun∣tur necessitate presentiae non efficientiae. as heate and cold in tepide luke-warmenesse, but in the high∣est degree they cannot. So (though we graunt with Saint Augustine, Aug. good workes to bee neces∣sary in regard of their presence, Fides appre∣hensive, opera declarative, Christ uc effe∣ctivae justifi∣cant. not of their effi∣ciency, and with Bernard, that they are the way to the Kingdome) Yet in the case of Iustification, Rom. 3. 28. Rom. 4. 6. and Rom. 6. 23. Conside∣red in their highest degree, Workes the cause of life everlasting. even to the very suffe∣rings of Martyrs, Rom. 8. 18. they can no more stand with mercy then Dagon of the Philistines is able to confront the holy Arke of IEHOVA, Rhem. annot. super 1 Sam. 5. 3. By which wee see the Papist, 2. Tim. 4. 8. like an unskilfull Empiricke in Physicke make a Potion for a sicke soule, Ruard. Tappe∣rus in explic. artic. Lovan. as he that went into the field to gather herbes, but found a wilde Gourd, and put it into the pottage, while the eaters cryed out, Death in the pot, 2 Kings 4. 39. So doe they tem∣per the soules-salving herbe of grace, with the poysoning Gourd of humane merrit, dealing with the Church of God, as unkindly, as unnatu∣rall Parents, or Nurses giving their children a stone for bread, and a Scopion for a fish, as the Phi∣listines with Isaacks wels, stopping them with earth, Re∣ward of Favour. Debt. Ʋis excidere gratiam tunc jacta merita tua. Aug. in Psal. 31. Gen. 26. 15. Choaking and damming up the fountaine of Grace, which ought to be open to the house of Iacob, Zach. 13. 1. Changing the reward of favour and promise, Col. 3. 24. into their owne, of debt. Nay, further, it is the corrupt and dangerous conceite of many who would not bee accounted popish, but seeme to magnifie the free mercies of God, which yet will be saved by well-doing, good meanings, and good prayers, like the children of the Iewes, who marrying with the Ashàodites, spake halfe in their language, Neh. 13. 24. which is an impeachment to their suffe∣rings, which trode the wine-presse cleane, Isa. 63. which will not give to others, nor communicate this his glory with others, Isa. 42. 8. It is onely mercy without merrit, that must lift a man from the gates of despaire, when the angry brow of the Almighty is bended against him for sinne, Non dìaphore∣cus sed grumo∣sus sudor. Chri∣sti. as we see in David, Psal. 51. &c. and our Saviour Christ standing in the gappe of Gods wrath (being but our surety and pledge) yet his soule was heavy unto death, trickling down those thicke drops of blood, in his miraculous sweat in the Garden; thou mayest for a while with Da∣vid cast the darke cloud of security over thy sins to hide them, as the fish Sepia casts up a blacke li∣quor to hide her selfe, but woe be to them that seeke in deepe to hide their counsell from the Lord, their workes are in secret, and they say, who sees it? Isa. Ita gravis est culpa conscien∣tiae ut sine, ju∣dice ipsa se pu∣mat. Ambr. l. 2. de penit. 29. 15. Eccles. 23. 18. Hee that searcheth Ie∣rusalem with a lanthorne, will find thee out, and rouze up thy slumbering Conscience, and then so heavy is the sinne of conscience that without any more evi∣dence it passeth Iudgement upon it selfe, Pro. 18. 14. A wounded spirit, who can beare? even none but God. In all other troubles, miseries, and mole∣stations we wrastle with men or divels, but here (impar congressus) weake man with his Maker, brittle clay with it's Potter, sinfull man with ho∣ly God, which is of purer eyes then to looke up∣on evill, Hab. 1. 13. and a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29. In other things, man is a friend and favou∣rite to himselfe, as Peter perswades CHRIST to pittie himselfe, but here he is his owne enemy, and often in the rage of his conscience, his owne executioner, as in Iudas and Pilate, Iere. 20. 4. Re∣hold, I will make thee a terrour to thy selfe, thy memo∣rie, reason, every sense and faculty of thy soule, is a Gorgonian-hell- urie, to torment thee. Now in this case when a mans bones is full of the sinnes of his youth, Iob 20. 11. His heart broken with one breaking upon another, Iob 16. 14. His con∣science upon the racke, his God writing bitter things against him, Cor meum a te, inquietum est donec redeat ad te. Aug. li. 1. Confess. Iob 23. 26. Then comes the mercy of God to comfort him, all other com∣forts of workes, merits, satisfactions, &c. are mi∣serable comforters, Iob 16. 2. And will consume as a rotten thing, and as a garment that is moth-ea∣ten; the soule of a Christian is like Noahs Dove, which finds no safety, till returning to the Arke of Gods mercie. Comfort thy selfe then in Gods mercie, which will not suffer thee to bee over-yoaked with thy sinnes, plead with him in the receiving of Adam, Manasses, and the whole troupe of re∣conciled sinners, and though thine adversarie Sa∣than write a booke against thee, answere cursed Cain disabling Gods mercy, Mentiris Cain. Aug. Gen. 4. 13. with Au∣gustine, Thou lyest Cain; for greater is Gods mer∣cie, than mans iniquitie, and say to thy disconso∣late spirit, Why art thou so sad my soule, Psalm. 11. And as we ought, Vse. 2. and in dutie are enjoyned to give thankes for all things, so are we chiefely to sing our Ha elu-jahs unto God, for the perfor∣mance of the promised Messiah, and that in the practise and phrase of the Priest Zacharie, Lu. 1. 68 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for hee hath visited and redeemed his people, &c. And with old Simeon in his Cygnean dying Hymne, Blessed be thou, O Lord, for our eyes have seene thy salvation, L ke 2. 30. That fountaine of living waters, Iere. 2. 12. In regard of whom all other things are but the broken Cysternes of vaine and disconso∣late hope. The refreshing waters of Gods free mercies,, the purchase whereof is without mo∣ney or prize, Ecce quam an∣tea vocaveat a quam nunc appellat vinam & lac, quae sunt res pretio∣fissimae. Tertull. Esa 55. 2. least you thinke it too deare, and because water, if you thinke it not worth the labour, it's wine and milke, whose worth and necessitie you well know, that true A∣qua vitae, w ch whoso drinketh shall never thirst, but it shall be in him a well of water springing up unto everlasting life, Iohn 4. 14. He is our Beth∣lehem and house of bread, the living bread that came downe from heaven, Ioh. 6. 35. He is a ship of safety which beares us by the comfortable goale of his love, Socrat. l. 4 c. 16 Theodor. li. 4. cap. 18. and the gentle Zephirus of his mercie, from the shelves and rocks of blacke dispaire, so that though immodest. Sozom. li. 6. ca. 18. Modest as Generall to the Emperour Valens the Arrian, burne the ship wherein the Christian Legats were imbarked, seeking to destroy the Confessors and professors of Christianity, which though they perished in their wooden barke, were sure enough in the hea∣venly Arke by CHRIST. He is that unspeakea∣ble gift of God, for which we must give thankes, 2 Cor. 9. vlt. And if thou knowest the gift of God, Iohn 4. 10. Which is the gift of all gifts, which is given to us, Esa. 9. 6. In comparison of whom all other are but as the drop of a Buc∣ket to the whole Ocean, in whom, appeare the bowels of Gods love, and the inscrutable depths of his mercy in him, through him, and by him (while we were sinners and enemies) to bring to passe that wonderfull worke of our Redemp∣tion, Ioh. 3. 16. Rom. 5. 8. In him by this wee see the fulnesse of it, 1 Iohn 4. 9. And as Bethlem to Iurie, and Scicilia to Italie, were accounted their granary for their fruitfulnesse, the Poets fai∣ning Ceres to keepe residence there; so may our Saviour CHRIST be accounted as the store∣house and Cornu-copia of all good things to his Church, Col. 2. 3. In whom are hid all the trea∣sures of wisedome and knowledge, the fulnesse of the Godhead bodily, ver. 9. In him we are com∣pleate, ver. 10. Knowledge and wisedome are in men by revelation, in Angels by vision, but in him by union; of whose fulnesse wee all receive, Iohn 1. 16. Thy being, well-being, and eternall being, have their dependance on him: this con∣solation of Israel, Euseb. li. 1. devita Con∣stantini in hoc vince. this expectation of the Gentiles, this Noah to comfort thee, Gen. 5. 29. This cru∣cified Lord, shewed to Constantine to comfort him in his expedition, against the Tyrant Max∣entius, with a promise of victory, is opposed a∣gainst all thy feares and discontents; if finne presse and oppresse thee, he is thy righteousnesse, 1 Cor. 1. 30. If the curse vexe thee, he is thy blessing, Gen. 12. 2. Galath. 3. 8. If weakenesse pinch thee, he is thy strenght, Phil. 4. 13. 2 Cor. 12. 9. If the great debt of thy sinnes lay hold on thee, charging to pay that thou owest, he is thy paiment, Matth. 17. 27. If damnation make thee afraid, he is thy salvation, Acts 4. 10. If death, he is thy life, Iohn 14. 6. If Sathan, he hathover come him, Heb. 2. 14. If hell shall open her mouth upon thee, he hath victoriously Sampson∣like borne away the gates, quelled and quashed the power of it, Hos. 13. 14. So that in and through him onely, thou art more then a Conquerour. Be not like the Horse or Mule that have no understan∣ding, nor like the sonnes of the earth, the cocke∣red Darlings of unstable Fortune, who gaping af∣ter the transitory things of the world, can onely now and then, in a carnall humour send forth a short ejaculatory Thanksgiving for their tempo∣rals which they possesse, but seldome or never for CHRIST IESVS, which they possesse not, without whom, they must be content to perish for ever. This is that rich pearle bestowed up∣on the Merchant, resolving above all things to seeke the kingdome of God and his righteous∣nesse, setting saile for the Cape De bona Speransa, fraught and bound for the New Ierusale ; than let thy mouth from thy heart) the fountaine of all true praise, be as this silver Trumpet filled with Hallalu-jahs for this heavenly and unspeak∣able gift. Thirdly, Vse. 3. this Doctrine just in the phrase of another Baptist preaching in the wildernesse of Iudea, cryes unto us in a more then necessary ex∣hortation, especially in these last and worst dayes, Repent for the Kingdome of God is at hand, Matth. 3. 2. The selfe-same holy use which the Spirit of holinesse drawes from the Doctrine, Rom. 2. 4. Despisest thou the riches of his good∣nesse, and forbearance and long suffering, not knowing that the goodnesse of God leadeth thee to repentance? 2 Peter, Chapter 3. verse 9. The Lord is not slacke concerning his promises, as some men count slacknesse, but he is long suffe∣ring toward us, not willing that any, should perish, but that all should come to repentance; Turne yee then unto the Lord, your God, for hee is gracious and mercifull, slow to anger, of great kind∣nesse, and repenteth him of the evill, Ioel 2. 13. and that you may rightly turne, find ease and refresh∣ing for your soules; Consider, that as in Iacobs ladder, which reached from earth to heaven, there were certaine steppes for ascending and descending, so are there certaine degrees in de∣scending to this all-curing Bethesda of repen∣tance. First, is an inward perplexitie, sitting like Ha∣gar, Gen. 21. 15. when her bottle was emptied, or like the Prodigall, Luke 15. which by his want is forced to a consideration of his estate, re∣torting his thoughts into himselfe, is deepely affected, with the solid apprehension of his owne misery, In se reverte∣bat. Ierom. verse 17. and in this perplexed case con∣cludes against himselfe; that if he remaines as hee was, his case was desperately hopelesse, and hee must perish for ever; upon which, hee resolves with himselfe, to goe home to his fathers house, by repentance, seeing the gate of Mercie opened to all true penitents; wicked men have but one spirituall eye, by which they see the horrid pit∣fall of their misery, A penetent person hath tvvo eyes. as Cain, Iudas, &c. but the penitent hath two, with the one he sees his mise∣ry by sinne; with the other, his hopefull comfort by Gods mercie, and thus his feare becomes fili∣all, Psal. 130. 4. Thou art mercifull, and worthy to be feared, drawing the Argument of his sonne∣like obedience from that mercie, which he feares to misse; the wicked mans service (if ever he have any) springs from a terrour of judgement and wrath, w ch is only servile, the penitent beares not the image and superscription of a Pharisaicall Iu∣sticiarie, Luke 18. who begins with gloria patri, instead of miserere mei, his motto, I thanke thee, O God, that I am not like other men, but the portraiture of the poore Publican, perplexed, and knocking upon his breast; Crying, Lord be mercifull unto me a sinner. The second degree, is Sorrow, which ariseth from the former apprehension of Gods anger, and mans perplexed guilt standing before him, ar∣raigned and convicted in his owne Conscience, for so many and so manifold rebellions and transgressions. And here we must distinguish Sorrow which is two-fold; Sorrow two∣fold. first, a worldly sorrow, which is a dessembled, hypocriticall repentance, as in Ahab, Iudas, Esau, &c. Secondly, the other is a godly sorrow for sinne, proper onely to the godly man, and the true badge of the penitent, both which we see, 2 Cor. 7. 10. Godly sorrow worketh sal∣vation by repentance, not to be repented of, but the sorrow of the world worketh death; the for∣mer arising from the mercy of God, as being sor∣rowfull that he hath offended him, as David, Psal. 51. 4. Against thee, thee onely have I sinned and done this evill in thy sight; the gracious fa∣vours which were bestowed upon him, as his exhaltation from a poore ruddy-faced Shep∣heard, to sit upon a Princely throne; his severall deliverances from the Beare, the Lion, the Cham∣pion of the Phlistines, and the sundry treacheries practised against him by his Master Saul, hunting him as a Partridge upon the mountaines, establi∣shing his kingdome, &c. with infinite more, be∣ing called into Davids remembrance and made the matter of his retired meditations, with his owne ungratefull ungracious rebellions, doe cause his eyes to distill like a Lymbecke, and his rocky-stony-pumise-dry heart, to over∣flowwith the Teares of a truely-sorrowfull∣penitent, and now his heart being hot within him, as at other times upon other considerations Psal. 39. 3. He breakes silence, and in the griefe of his soule complaines of the ill requitall with which he had recompenced the Lord of his mer∣cifull kindnesse. The like wee may see in that patterne of penitents, the profuse Prodigall, Luk. 15. The sinne-loden-citizen woman, Luke 7. 47. Comming attended with shame and sorrow, la∣vishly washing the feet of her Saviour with teares from her soules stillatory, that must wash not onely her feet, as was said to Peter, Iohn 23. 9. but also her hands and her head; this hath been, is, and must be, the course of every saved sinner to retire, and returne by weeping crosse; thus breaking the heads of Dragons in the water, wa∣shing away great sinnes by great sorrow: What shall then be said of the preposterous course of the world, doing all by contraries; like that Na∣tion, who in a crosse emulation of their neigh∣bours, whose custome in curtese is to put off their Hats in saluting one another; these (be∣cause they will be contrary) put off their shooes at their meetings; Hysteron-pro∣teron, in repen∣tance. so in this maine matter you shall see the wicked man play cart before horse, and in stead of sorrow for his sinnes, bragge and boast of them, as if the Peacocks pride lay in his blacke feete, or the Theeves glory in their hal∣ters, to boast of strength, to quarrell, and drinke wine, Hab. 2. 15. To boast of lying, stealing, cozening, policie, &c. with the bloudy Poligamist, Gen. 4. 23. I have slaine a man in my wounding, and a young man in my hurt; which Scripture, although Ca∣tharinus, thinke inexplicable, Hi ron. Epist. 125 d Da∣ vide Wil∣let super locu . and upon which O∣rigen writ two whole bookes, and with divers have diversly interpreted; yet with Calvin, it is most likely to be a bragge, and an insolent boast of his bloody strength. What is this else, but even to be proud of that which should be (and at length will be) the matter of our shame, and the confusion of our faces, Phil. 3. 19. They glory in their shame. The third degree in repentance after our humi∣liation, is the earnest craving and begging of par∣don, grounded likewise upon Gods mercifull kindnesse, a glympse of which the penitent sees, though dimmely (as the newly-cured blinde∣man, saw men walke like trees, or as Zebul, Iudg. 9. 39. Tooke men to be but the shadowes of the mountaines) yet truely, Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him turne to the Lord; the reason followes, and he will have mercy upon him, and will abundantly pardon; the like. Hos. 6. 1. Come let us returne unto the Lord, the reason moving; for he hath torne, and he will heale us; he hath smit∣ten, and he will bind us up: and this assurance of mercie and willingnesse to forgive, armes the sinner with boldnesse, to sollicite the throne of Grace; so that hee which unfainedly repents, be∣leeves, and prayes for pardon, Repentance and prayer being inseparable Companions, Eccle. 3. 12. Examine thy selfe than with what boldnesse thou prayest, filling heaven and earth with the Abba, Father, how thou commest to God as thy father, in the name of CHRIST as they Redee∣mer, by the power of the Spirit of Adoption: as by Gods mercy in the assurance of thy faith in¦teressed in all the promises, being drawne here∣to by the cords of love, and the bands of mercie; and this hath been the pathway, in which all the high Saints and servants of God have traced and troden to their Celestiall home, it being Gods owne precept, Psal. 30. 15. Call upon mee in the time of trouble, &c. The fourth degree ushered by the former, is newnesse of life, springing. Likewise out of the brazen mountaines of Gods constant mercies, as continent Ioseph makes his advancement, the ar∣gument of his chastitie, Gen. 39. 8. Hee answered his Mistresse, behold my Master woteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed all that he hath to my hand, there is none greater in this house than I, neither hath he kept any thing from mee, but thee, because thou art his wife, how then can I doe this great wickednesse and sinne against God? Three things stay Ioseph from committing this sinne; first, the feare of God; secondly, the love of his Master, in regard of his liberality; third∣ty, the dutie of the wife toward her husband, as learned Mercerus hath well observed. Mercerus super cap. 39. Genes. Peterius in ge∣nesin. Or first, the reverence of Gods Majesty, seeing and behol∣ding all things; secondly, the consideration of his mercie and benefits received; thirdly, the feare of judgement, as Pererius, he knew all the honours of Egypt could not buy of the guilt of one sinne; a good heart will rather lie in the dust, then rise by wickednesse in offending a mercifull God, and thus it is grounded, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Vpon Gods mer∣cifull promises, Having therefore these promises, dearely beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all fil∣thinesse of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holinesse in the feare of God; The same Apostle, by the same Apostolicall spirit, exhorts to renovation of life by the same reason, Rom. 12. 1. I beseech you Bre∣thren, by the mercies of God, that you present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable seruice. Then beloved, let the mercifull kindnesse of God, which every houre thou triest upon thee and thine, even in thy food, raiment, liberty, friends, breathing, &c. be∣sides those inestimable treasures of his love in thy daily preservation, &c. draw thee to repentance in newnesse of life, to stampe upon thee a new creature, Turne not the grace of God into wanton∣nesse, Iude 4. but know, that the grace of God hath appeared to teach us, to deny ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, and to walke honestly, soberly and righteously in this present world, Tit. 2. 12. Wee are delivered from the feare of our enemies, to make our obedience without feare, Luke 1. 74. being under grace then, let us give up our members weapons of righteousnesse, Rom. 6. 19. Seeing all the mer∣cies of God like so many remembrancers, cry unto us for this dutie; let us not despise (under∣valuing and vilipending) the mercies of God, Simon Magus Basilides, Eu∣nomius, and the Gnosticks. in living after our owne hearts, and following our owne crooked wayes, as those Heretiques of old, which sprung up from the malicious seed of the Serpent, immediately after the Apostles, have wickedly taught; else yee heape up wrath against the day of wrath, and make the holy Gospell of CHRIST IESVS, no better, then the Turkes licen∣tious Alcoran, which is fraught with nothing but the merchandize of the corrupted flesh, large promises of Epicurisme in Paradise. But Christians must not so learne CHRIST backe againe by repentance is the better way, loosing the Herculian gordian knot, and unwea∣ving with Penelope the webbe of thy sins, else can we not hope for peace; For there is no peace to the wicked, Isa. 48. 22. Our iniquities have made a division betwixt God and us, Isa. 59. 2. which must be broken downe by repentance; if thou aske, being in the Gibeonitish rags of thy sinnes, as Iehoram asked Iehu, Is it peace? is it peace. 2 Kings 9. Grace and peace insepara∣ble Compani∣ons. 18. Shall there be peace betwixt God and thy soule; the answer retorts it selfe vpon thee, What hast thou to doe with peace? so long as thou wantest Grace, and lyest polluted; prostituting thy Soule and Body to all prophanenesse. What wicked man ever had peace? Let Caine, Achito∣phell, Antiochus, Epiphanes, Nero, &c. With the whole garison of Scorners be brought vpon the stage, and they will answer, they never had peace; because they never had renovation by Repen∣tance. Come then while the Lord is neere, and seeke him while he may be found. Isa. 55. 6. Seeing the mercifull kindnesse of God is so largely extended to all Creatures, Vse. 4. but more and most especially to Man, it teacheth us to be his followers and imitators in this, and as he hath propounded himselfe an exampler and patterne in other things to be followed, Omnis actio Christi est no∣stra instructio. as in his Holines, Levit. 9. 2. Cap. 20. 7. Be holy for I am holy. E∣very of his morall actions being our instructors, so he would be imitated in this act of Mercy, Mat. 5. 45. Doe good to them that hate you, that you may bee the Children of your Father which is in hea∣ven, who causeth his Sunne to shine both vpon the bad, and the good, and this our duty of mer∣cy consists in two things. Act of Mercie wofolde. 1. In giving, 2. In forgiving. First, in Giving, that is compassionately and pittying, administring to the necessity of our bre∣thren, taught vnto vs in the Communion of Saints: As citizens of one Corporation, bran∣ches of one Vine, members of one body, all vnder one Head, the body of CHRIST. Colos. 2. 17. so to sympathise in affections, as to have a sen∣sible feeling of our mutuall wants, like Peters new converts, Acts, 2. 44. which is not Anabap∣tisticall, denying all propriety of Goods or Lands to any Man, nor all to be meum, tuum, Common, but as a Christian tendering one ano∣thers good, and a supportation of their wants, as Act. 11. 28. when Agabus signified by the spirit, that their should be Dearth throughout the World, the Disciples every man according to his ability, determined to send reliefe to the brethren which dwelt in Iudea. Heb. 13. 3. Re∣member them which are in prison, as bound with them, and them that suffer adversity as your selves being in the body, for if one mem∣ber suffer, all the members suffer with it. 1. Cor. 12. Aelian. lib. 13. de varia, hist. 26. And a Righteous man even pittyeth in∣feriour creatures, hee regardeth the life of his Beast. Prov. 12. 10. Like Xenocrates, an Heathen Philosopher, whose pittyfull heart succoured in his bosome, the poore Sparrow, eagerly pursu∣ed of her Enemie the Hawke. Be then exhorted to this duty, there are great numbers of poore Lazarusses which lye at thy Gates, bearing the image of CHRIST in their naked bodies, give vnto them not sparingly, that thou mayest reape liberally, for thy harvest must answer thy Seede-time, an Almoner is like an Archer, Simile. which aimeth at the marke in the middest of the white, the White he seeth, the Marke he seeth not; the marke he cannot hit which he seeth not, vnlesse he hit the white which he seeth, so we cannot hit God the marke which we ayme at, vnlesse we hit the white which is Man. 1. Iohn 4. 20. If wee love not our Brother whom wee have seene, how can wee love God, whom wee have not seene, those that abound with Gods blessings, must be like the full end of an houre-glasse-emptying them∣selves into the needy? Greg. Nazian∣zen monodia in Basill. mag. Gregory Nazianzen re∣gestring the life of great Basill, commends a Ze∣nodochium, or house of Harbour, which he built for strangers above the Egyptian Pyramides, the famous Sepulcher of Mansolus, or the famous Collossus of Rhodes, or any other wonder in the world; so thy mercy shewed to the poore, shall make thy name like an odoriserous perfume made by the art of the Apothecarie, smell after thee to blesse thine increase in all things, the plow-man shall touch the Mower, Ecce misericor∣diam actiuam, praesta mihi passiuam. and the treader of grapes him that soweth seede, Amos 9. 13. Thy moun∣taines shall drop sweete wine, and all thy hills shall melt, cast then thy bread upon the waters. Eccles. 11. 1. And when thou makest a Feast call in the lame and the blind, Luke 14. 13. and like Elisha, Semen Eleemo∣synae magis multiplicatur in sterili, quam pingui terra powre thy oyle into emptie, not full ves∣sels. 2. King 4. 4. The seede of almes growes better, thrives and multiplies more aboundant∣ly in a poore then fat Earth, let the feeble hearts of the Saints b e comforted by thee, Philemon 7. The second, is shewed in forgiving, the p e∣cept of which is laid downe Eph. 4. 32. For∣giue Stella sup. luc one another as God for CHRISTS sake for∣gave you; when our Saviour CHRIST had laid it downe in that methodicall Prayer com∣mended and commanded to his Church, Mat. 6. 12. And that vnder paine of excommunication from God retaliating vpon vs the same measure we offer to others, knowing our backward per∣versnesse in performing those duties of love, es∣pecially this, of forgiving, he begins a fresh Ser∣mon, Verse 14. Drawne from the law of equity, by which we shalbe measured, If you will not for∣give men their trespasses, no more will your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses. In the parable of the vnmercifull servant Mat. 18. 34. How sharpely doth our Saviour reprehend him? O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt because thou desiredst mee, shouldest not thou also have had com∣passion on thy fellow, as I had pitty on thee; and his Lord was wroth and delivered him to the tor∣mentors, &c. Pro. 19. 11. It is the glory of a man to passe by offences. Yet not in a foolish pitty, as Ahab with Benhadad. 1. King. 21. let∣ting him escape whom the Lord had comman∣ded to be slaine; or to take away the sword from the secular Magistrate, the Kings owne Sonne borne of his Grace and soveraignety; for he is appointed to punish offenders, In the law as well Peace of∣ferings as meato offerings. whose ordinance is from God. Rom. 13. 4. of such, Deut. 19. 13. Their eyes must not spare the offenders, whose escapements by their negligence shalbe requi∣red at their hands, but of revenge for private wrongs to take the sword of Iustice into our owne hands how dare we when God hath threat∣threatned (by the mouth of truth it selfe) that their shalbe iudgement without mercy, to him that sheweth no mercy, Iniurias illata raró iure sed feraro vindi∣cant, Munster. and he that forgiveth not, must never be forgiven; how many woes then lye vpon this Iron age, wherein we live, how many of those barbarous Scythians which seeke no iustice but by bloody cruelty, sword and revenge to right themselves, say not then, I will recom∣pence evill, but waite vpon the Lord and he shall save thee, Ioseph and Da∣vid both hono∣rable the one in pardoning his Brethren Gen. 50. 21. the other his ene∣mie. Prov. 20. 22. How many are there whose hearts are as hard as the nether mill-stone, and whose hands are withered like the hand of Ieroboam, which they cannot stretch forth to give any thing. If they give, it is for their owne ends and not for the affliction of Iosoph, Amos 6. 6. 2. Sam. 19. 23. Which with many more, showes that we are but emptie barrels, sounding, but holding no li∣quor, our professions like the bird with the great voyce, but almost no body, and as we know not how to give, no more doe we how to forgive; our private grudges, heart-burnings, and conti∣nuall suits (which makes one cluster of humane Lawe more esteemed, then the whole Vintage of divine Law) proclaime that our profession is nought but policie, our cases in Law, more worth than the cases of Conscience. Lastly, Vse. 5. this doctrine serveth as a Counterplea to a false Challenge, made by the wicked and vn∣regenerate Man, daring in his presumptuous se∣curity to challenge those mercies of God, as his owne by free Charter, like the Divels lay claime to the whole World, Mat. 4. 9. All these things will I give thee, pretending them all to be his owne free Lordship, but Dan. 4. 21. It is Iehovah the most high God that beareth rule over all the Kingdomes of Men, & giveth them vnto whom he will. Athenaeus in dipnosoph. li. 12. Or like the deepe Lunatike, who dreames of Kingdomes, and greatnesse, being poore; or like the Foole in Athens, who challenged all the Ships in the port, and all the riches that came to the Citty to he his, when in the meane time hee had scarce a rag to cover himselfe withall; or like Isaiahs Dreamer, Isa. 29. ver. 8. dreaming of eating & drinking, but waking, his soule is emptie, hungry and thirsty; Or like Charles the 7. king of France, being by our victorious English and that warlike Ed∣ward named the Blacke-prince, almost expelled, and expulsed his whole Kingdome, was called King of the poore Biturgians, Rex Bituri∣gum. a King without a Kingdome. So doe the wicked claime an inter∣est in Gods mercies: CHRIST indeed is suf∣ficient for all, but not efficient to all, Ioh. 1. 12. To as many as received him he gave power to be called the sonnes of God. He came to all, but all receives him not; The mercies of God Psal. 120. Are from ever lasting to everlasting. Great are thy tender mercies, Psal 119. 156. but it is vpon them that feare him. Simile. Mal. 4. 2. Vpon such the Sunne of Righteousnesse shall shine with healings in his wings, as the Sunne is cheerefully pleasant to eyes that be found, so it is troublesome to the sore; so is CHRIST IESVS in his rising: and even as a halfe blind man passing over a nar∣row bridgevsing spectacles, Stell super Luc. which make the bridge seeme broader then it is, the blind man being thus deceived falls headlong into the wa∣ter; So by the spectacles of corrupt naturall rea∣son and presumption which the wicked man lookes through, Scias oportet quod quem ad. modum miseri∣cors est it a iust∣us et rectus. the mercy of God which is the bridge is made too broad & his iustice shruck too narrow, leaning vpon the one & forgetting the o∣ther till he tumble downe into the brimstone Gulfe of perdition, so that thou must know, saith Stella, that as he is mercifull so is he iust, and of most exact integrity. Zeph, 3. 5. The iust Lord is ia the middest of his Temple, he will doe no ini∣quity, every morning doth he bring his iudge∣ment to light; Grauissime. Therefore doth he punish most heavily in regard of the weight and greatnesse of sinne, Iustissime. most justly because of the holinesse of his Law, Certissime. and most certainely because of his integri∣ty & truth: In this regard Nehemiah Chap. 9. 33. acknowledgeth, Thou O lord art iust in all that is come vpon vs; for thou hast dealt truely, but we have done wickedly; Mercy and justice walk∣ing in a iust Paralell with God, Misericordia ct justicia pari∣gradum in deo currunt. humble thy heart than and examine thy selfe, if thou lye with Mo∣ab corrupted vpon the lees and dregs of Swear∣ing, Lying, Stealing, &c. Thy claime to Gods mercies is nought, thou art in the gall of bitter∣nesse, having neither part nor portion in this bu∣sinesse Act. 8. 21. Be ye not deceiued. 1. Cor. 6. 9. The vnrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdome of God. No vncleane thing is written in the Booke of the Lambe. Reu. 21. 27. Be thou then obe∣dient to the Heavenly vocation, and the mer∣cie of God shall imbrace thee on every side. The second motive, The second motive, inioyning us to the duty of praise, is drawne from the truth of the Lord, that is, the stedfast mutability, and the vnchang∣able constancie of his promises, the most cer∣taine and continuall testimonies of his Grace in sending CHRIST, and in him performing all those Covenants betwixt him and his people. The severall acceptions of the word truth. Sometime truth is taken as opposed to all the outward Leviticall cerimonies, onely shaddow∣ing the Messiah to come. Ioh. 4. 23. The time shall come when the true worshippers shall wor∣ship the Father in spirit and truth, sometime for sincerity in our conversation, Ioh. 3. 21. hee that doth truth commeth to the light, an Israelite in whom is no guile. Ioh. 1. 47. Sometime for the rule of Gods law, Rom. 2. 8. Disobeying the truth, and obeying vnrighteousnesse; and 1. Pet. 1. 22. Your selves are purified by obeying the truth. Sometime for the sincere doctrine of the Gos∣pell, Gal. 2. 5. that the truth of the Gospell might continue with you. Sometime for Iustice Prov. 20. 28. Mercy and truth preserves the King. Sometime for such a truth as depends not vp∣on Opinion which may erre, but for that Me∣taphysicall truth, which is affectio Entis, and such I take it to be here, and so in God it cannot faile, so taken, Rom. 3. 7. If the verity or truth of God, hath more abounded through my lye, and so vpon the premisses this doctrine builds it selfe. There is nothing more certaine to come to passe in a due and true performance, Doctrine. then the truth of all Gods promises. Wee neede not stand to prop the truth, of this truth, vpon any weake foundation of mans building, Reas. 1. for his truth is himselfe, Exod. 34. 6. aboundant in goodnesse and truth. Man may be said to be true, mercifull, just, but God is truth mercie and justice it selfe in the abstract; so the Prophet here brings his truth in the second place as the sure performer of his mercifull kindnesse, whatsoever, saith Calvyn, He doth promise by his mercy, Lib 3. Instit. cap. 4. quunque misericorditer pollicetur &c. he doth faithfully performe, because his mercy and truth are vndissolubly knit toge∣ther, they goe hand in hand, and cannot be se∣perated; and as he cannot lye nor deny himselfe, Tit. 1. 2. No more can his truth faile, Num. 23. 19. God is not as man, that he should lye, or the sonne of man to repent, his truth is confirmed, strengthened, veryfied, and so corroborated to∣ward us (for so the word translated great, Signifieat, aucta, confir∣mata corrobera∣ta verificata. in the Originall signifieth) that if we would we can∣not put it from us, but it will overcome us to acknowledge it, if the Lord speake it even to the miraculous continuing of the Meale in the bar∣rell, and the Oyle in the Cruse, 1. King. 17. 14. Even in the preservation and maintenance of the Patriarch Iacob, Gen. 32. 10. I am not worthy the least of thy mercies, Hessus super Psal. 117. and of all the truth which thou hast shewed vnto thy servant, heere is finem non habitura fides, his truth is even dec∣ked and clothed with constancy and firmnesse, we cannot obiect against him as the Poet against Iason, Ovid Epist. and in him against vnstable Man. Mobilis AEsonide vernaque incertior aura, Cur tua polliciti pondere verba earent? Inconstant sonne of AEson, fickle wight and more vnconstant then the wind in spring, How is it that thy words are growne so light, to want that weight should be in promising. He deserves not with Antigonus, to be called , . who promised much and performed little, neither with Thaeaginus, to be called smoake who promised much being very poore, neither with Hermodorus will he sell his words, he doth not, Deus fecit cbi∣rographum, promissorum non debendo sed promitten∣do in verbis dum sedit. Luc. ser. 31. will not, cannot, equivocate with man in the truth of his promises as he that promised cen∣tum oves, and performed centum ova, he hath gi∣ven us an hand-writing and obligation of promi∣ses, made himselfe our debter, not by owing but promising, sayth the great Bishop of little Hippo the heavenly Augustine, that we cannot say vnto him, give that thou owest, but we must pray vn∣to him, for what he promiseth; his promises are not like the golden shewes, nor showers of the World, who like Sathan, Mat. 4. 9. promise what they cannot perform, inverting the words of the wise Phocion, Magna non, pro∣mittenda sed facienda homi∣nibus. ser. de prud. who would have great matters per∣formed not promised, as Stobaeus witnesseth, but they promise golden mountaines, the opulency of Lidian Craesus, which in performance prove but moale-hills. Among the sonnes of the earth, some indeed performe that which after ward they repent, as Ioshua did to the Gibeonites, Ios. 9. 23. some promise what they can doe but meane it not, as Iacobs sonnes to the Sichemits, Gen 34. 26. Some promise willingly but give vn∣willingly, as Herod Iohn Baptists head to Herodias, Mar. 6. 16. Some promise but after deny it, as Laban dealt with Iacob. Gen. 29. 23. as is com∣plained Cap. 31. 41. Thou hast changed my wa∣ges tenne times, but the promises of God are to the faithfull in hope, without hope, above hope, and against hope, In spe, extra spem, supra spem contra spem. the father of the faithfull pro¦ved all this to be true, Rom. 4. 18. Who against hope beleeved in hope, that he might be the Fa∣ther of many Nations, the ground of whose Faith, was the promise according to that which was spoken, so shall thy seede bee, Gen. 15. 5. This was accompted vnto Abraham for righte∣ousnesse, Lib. 5. de A∣braham cap. 3. saith Ambrese, because he beleeved and required no reason, so the truth of the Lord en∣dureth for ever. Because he hath made his truth as strong as the brazen pillers of eternitie, Reas. 2. to encourage his ser∣vants wholly to relye vpon him, expecting the performance of his promises, he made them be∣fore the foundation of the World, inact them in the great Parliament of Heaven before all time, Ephe. 1. 5. they were and are, firme, stable, great and precious, to make us partakers of the divine nature, 2. Pet. 1, 4. performed in time when the time of promise came, which God had sworne to Abraham, 2. Things re∣quired in faith∣fulnesse both in God 1. Abilitie, given a word of prmoise. Rom. 9. 7 in Isaac shall thy seede be blessed, purposed sal∣vation for us before the world began, 2. Tim. 1. 9. Purchased inheritance of promise, Rom. 4. 21. Heb. 6. 12. be not sloathfull, 1. Thes. 5. 24. Willingnesse, but followers of them, which through Faith and patience inherit the promises adopted, Deu 32. Isa. 49. 7. 8. as children of promise, Gal. 4. 28. Now we brethren as Isaac, Heb. 10. are the children of pro∣mise, drawne Covenants of promise, Heb. 11. Ephes. 2. 12. The spirit of truth the Scrivener of them. 2. Tim. 2. 13. Ephes. 1. 1. Pet. 5, 7. 13. And sealed with the spirit of promise, ha∣ving set not onely his hand, 1 Ioh. 3. 1. but the signet of his right hand, Isa. 45. 15. the character & ingraven image of his own person, Amen. The truth of the father, 2. Cor, 10. 10. All the promises of God are yea, & Amen in CHRIST, which is the truth it selfe. Reu. 3. 14. These things, saith the Amen the true and faithfull witnesse, the new convenant drawne, Ier. 31. 31. And the counterpane thereof. Heb. 8. 8. Are of more force and vertue then all the bills, bonds, and obligations be they never so curi∣ously and cunningly framed in the winding M ∣ander of a Ploydons braine, Heaven and Earth shall passe ereone jot, or title of these can perish; nay if there were neither booke, record, inke or pa∣per in the world, they are written more surely then with a pen of Iron, ingraven more firmely then with the point of a Diamond by the spirit of Gods grace, and adoption in the heart of eve∣ry beleever; and further, we have not onely his bond and counterpane thereof, but for our bet∣ter assurance wee have his oath, Gen. 22. 16. I have sworne by my selfe, as much as if he had said, let me be no more God, if these things be not perform∣ed, thus Isa. 45. 23. sometime for this purpose, he sweareth by his Soule, Ier. 51. 14. Amos 6. 8. by his Name, Ier. 44. 26. by his Holines, Amos 4. 2. by his right hand, Isa 62. 8. so to sweare by himselfe his Name, Holinesse, &c. are all one (contrary to Philo the Iewe, Lib. 2. de Alle∣goris legiss. who would have God to sweare by himselfe, and man by his attributes) thus God for our assurance deales with us like a debter, who for the certainty of payment pawns his Faith, Truth, Soule, and sometime his God, and this promise was so Sacred even in the light of Nature, that Adesilaus King of the Lace∣demonians, Que promisse non servate De∣os sibi hostes reddidisses. thanked Tissiphernes for breaking his promised truce, because by this breach he had in∣curred the anger of the Gods; if thus inviolable in Man, Plutarch. how much more in God, who will not falsifie his truth, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his mouth, Psal. 89. 33. and whose truth of promise is so confirmed in his CHRIST, Rom. 15. 8. It was the worthy resolution of the Pro∣phets long before the actuall incarnation of CHRIST, and the reall performance of that great mysterie, 1 Tim. 3. 16. that he would performe his truth to Iacob, Mic. 7. 20 that he is the Lord Ie∣hova and changeth not, Mal. 3. 6. and that he is faithfull, 2 Tim. 2. 13, so that his truth endureth for ever. And that we may be the more assured of this turth for our third Reason, Reason 3 let us looke a little into the all-sufficiency of his power, and launch our selves into the mayne Ocean of his omnipo∣tencie, Psala. 1 35. 6 Rom. 9. 19 Prov. 21. 30 David tels us, Psal, 115. 3, hee hath done whatsoever pleased him, he hath potentiall pow∣er, by which he is able to doe more then he will. As of stones to rayse up children to Abraham, Aposse ad esse non valet, con∣sequentia in Deo. Math. 3. 9. to send 12 legions of Angels to rescue our Saviour CHRIST from the Crosse, Math. 26. 53. to built a thousand worlds, &c. But his will is the limmit of his power, In his actuall power by which he mightily works in the daily preservation and gubernation of his creatures, he works not with wearinesse, irkesomenesse or tediousnesse, but without all impediment, not as Man in the sweate of his face, but in the whole Hexameron and worke of Creation, he onely spake the Word and they were made successive∣ly in order, by his word onely he causeth the thunder, which is his glorious voyce, the Hindes to calve, and the whole course of nature to be continued in her severall species without con∣trolment, so that whether wee respect his prin∣cipall promise in sending CHRIST. the desire of all nations, or his inferiour lesse principall, all are surely sealed duely to be performed unto us, and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever. But it may be obiected against the faithfulnes of Gods truth, Object. Gen. 12. 7, hee promiseth to give Abraham the land of Canaan, but he inherited it not as the protomartyr witnesseth, Acts 7. 4. God brought him in but gave him no in∣heritance in it, no not the breadth of one foote. Resp. Answer Though Abraham did not personally possesse it, yet he may be said to inherite it two wayes. First, mystically as it was not onely a fertile fruitfull and country in Asia (as Scicilia to Italie) but likewise it did Typically shadowe the Kingdome of Heaven, the celestiall Canaan, the Church Tryumphant, and this did Abraham inherit in his owne person, Sinus dicuntur loca maris a procellis & turbine vento∣rum Liberima Stella. super Luc. 16. called his owne bo∣some, Luke 16. 23. into which all the faithfull are gathered as into a sure haven, out of the ra∣ging stormes of the glassie Sea, the brickle world, Rev. 4. 6. So that God in the performance of his promises, though he give not the samething, yet hee give something equibalent, as to Iosia, 2 Kings 22. 10. Though he gaue him not long life, the promised portion to obedient children Exo. 20. 12. yet he gave him a more excellent thing, taking him from the evill which presentlie upon his death fell heavily vpon his people, and giv∣ing him a better life in Heaven. Secondly, 2. he may be said to inherit it, though not in his owne person, or his immediate seede, yet in his posterity, 430 yeares after the pro∣mise was made, as the Apostle proveth, Gal. 3. 17. so though not to the same parties, yet to their successors the truth of God is surely performed, the godly mans patience is expected, for Hab. 2. 3. the vision is for an appoynted time though it tarty, waite for it, which shall surely come and not stay, thus Psal. 97. 11. Light is sowne for the the righteous, not in the harvest, but in the seede time, thy harvest is but in hope, as the husband∣man casteth his seede into the ground, and is con∣tent to stay the time of the reaping, so must wee waite for the promises. And though yet hee hath not gathered the dispiered of Iacob his an∣cient people, yet the time shall come when the Shulamites shall returne and the spirit of grace shall be powred upon the Inhabitants of Ierusa∣lem, Zach. 12. 10. CHRIST himselfe the coyne or corner stone and to joyne together those two great seeds, A Corner is an inclination or bovving of 2 lines, the one to the other and the one touching the o∣ther, not being directly ioyned together. the Iewes and Gentiles, as by a corner two wals, (which otherwise were broken a sun∣der) are joyned and made one and the building perfected, Ephes. 2, 20. and thus of the truth of all his promises revealed to his Church from time to time, sealed by the infallible witnesse of the Spirit of truth, even to Peters vision, Acts 10. 19 are and shall surely be performed: Euclid. lib. 1. Element. so the Doc∣trine is confirmed against all Atheists that doubt of any of the particulers and say, Mat. 21. 42. 2 Pet, 3. 5. Where is the promise of his comming? Psal. 118 22 1 Pet. 2. 7 and against all those by whom the way of truth is blasphmed and evill spoken of, let God be true, and every Man a lyer, Rom. 3. 4. To teach us to make the truth of God in his promises, Vse. 1. the ground worke of our comfort, stedfastly setling our faith and full assurance thereon, Charitas adop∣tionis veritas promissionis, po test as redditle∣nis. devote Barnard in the consideration of this truth was even ravished in an holy extasie, saying O the wonderfull love of God, in our adopti∣on, the trueth of his promises and his power in their performance, we must beleeve with Abraham, (be∣leeving above hope) though in mans reason they seemed to be frustrate, as those millions of Nati∣ons to issue out of halfe sacrificed Isaac, and with faithfull Paul, who in his dangerous voyage to Rome (a great tempest arising, neither Sunne nor Starres appearing for many dayes, and being hopelesse of all safety) Acts 27. 20. saw by the vision of his faith, and comforts the Marriners, that there should be no losse of any mans life, but onely of the Ship, and with David, Psal. 77. 2 n the day of my trouble I sought the Lord, &c. when his Soule was full of anguish, refusing comfort, ready to enter the Port of blacke dis∣paire, verse 7. Will the Lord cast off for ever, and will hee be favourable no more, hath he forgotten to be gracious, &c. yet hee checks himselfe, Verse 9. This is mine infirmity and weaknesse. So must we in the middest of our fiery tryals, when the old Serpent, layes the strongest siege at the Castle of our faith, seeking by the roaring Cannons and murdering Bassaliscoes of diffidence and distrust, to weaken our hope in the truth of Gods pro¦mises. And to shake our faith (the anchor of our Soule, onely able to stay it in the swelling surges, and boysterous waves of all temptations and crosses) Heb 6. 19. But let thy faith, which is the ground of things hoped for, & the subsist∣ing of things which are not seene Heb. 11. 1. grounded upon the truth of God, which purpo∣sed, framed, confirmed and inacted, thy happi∣nesse in the starrie coast of Heaven before the foundation of the world, counter-guard thy heart against all the deepnesse, strength, power and pollicy of Sathan, build thy selfe upon the rocke, Mat. 7. 24. Which is CHRIST, 1 Cor. 3. 11. and Wee are stones built upon him, 1 Pet. 2. 5. say of this truth as Gamaliel in such a case, Acts 5. 39. This is of God, it cannot be destroyed or frustra∣ted, be not faithlesse, but beleeving, sinke not with Cephas in the pit of diffidency, Mat. 14 31. but let his truth be thy supporter in all thine ad∣versities, let thine helpe stand (not upon the san∣dy foundation of thine owne weakenesse) but in the name of the Lord, Psal. 121. 2. Rowse up th selfe with the cripple at the beautifull gate of the Temple, Act; 3. 8. for He that trusts in the Lord is as Mount Sion which cannot be remooved, Ps. 125. 1. Secondly, Vse. 2. out of the stedfastnesse of this truth learne further, that in it are considerable, 2 things Hos. 2. 23. First, on Gods part, Thou art my people, Secondly, on our part, Thou art my God, hee pro∣miseth, confirmeth and performeth happinesse, wee holinesse, hee glory, wee duty, hee heaven, wee obedience, hee to be a father, wee to be∣come children, hee is tyed to us by oath, and we are bound to him in the strayte irrepealable con∣dition of vowe; if we want not in obedience, he cannot in performance, and if wee ex∣pect his performance, let us looke unto our owne part which is obedience, which if wee should doe with the reflecting optique and per∣spicill of true judgement, and consider the croo∣kednesse of our pathes, he backwardnesse of our obsequence, and the perverse carriage of our lives, wee may with our tongues say with Saul, to Samuell, 1. Sam. 15. 13. Blessed bee thou of the Lord: I have fulfilled the Commandement of the Lord, but it might justly bee retorted against vs, and sheathed in the inmost closset of our consci∣ences in Samuels reply? What meaneth then the bleating of the Sheepe in mine eare? and the lowing of oxen which I heare? Thus might it be replyed to our pretended holinesse and obedience, what meane those troupes of Blasphemers, Atheists, Drunkards, Lyers, &c. which like the frogs of Egypt, cover the whole land, and yet presumptu∣ouslie daring, claime the promises of God, and scarce bearing the outward face of Christians, yet are impudently bold with the gaine-saying Iewes, to cleere themselves, and say, Mal. 3. 8. Wherein have wee trespassed? When in the meane time our consciences testifie, that wee have wea∣ryed the Almighty, pressed and oppressed him as a Cart with sheaves, Amos, 2. 13. with our enormous transgressions, and rebellions commit∣ted with an high hand, Num. 15. 13. seated in the chayre of the scornefull, Masked with brasen∣faced impudencie that we blush not, Ier. 8. 12 with a blockish benummednesse, a calumne and brawny dulnesse of heart, that we cannot enter into the chambers of our heart in the considera∣tion of our wayes, not once crying in the re∣morse of soule, Alas, what have I donne? Ier. 8. 6 the very tryall of our countenances testifying against us, Esay 3 9. that wee can lay no sure ti l to the Covenant and promise of Mercy, because wee ilfully tre under foote the vowe of obedi∣ence but even that God in the rigour of his ju∣stice, 1 Sam. 3. 11. should make our two eares to tingle, and our bellies to tremble, Hab. 3. 16. and not to be mercifull to such an one, Deut. 29. 19. that addeth drunkennesse to thirst, blood to touch blood, Hos. 4. 3. heaping one sinne upon a∣nother; as one wave of the Sea followeth in the necke of another, where is now the correspon∣dence of this obedience, when thou hast delt thus falsely in Gods covenant. Psal. 44. 67. When thine eares and thine heart are uncircumcised, thy necke not used to the yoake, thy rebellions growne so sinewie and strong, that they cannot bowe, and the promises of mercy for all this be∣ing made the Argument of thy security, like the Sycamoore, the more wet it receives, the dryer it is, so thou, the more mercy the lesse o∣bedience, what part of Gods truth canst thou clayme, but that of his justice, even to be bray∣ed and brayned with the foole in the morter of his wrath, though thou be in no dammage like other men, but flo wrish like a greene bay tree, as David, and that thy breasts be full of milke, and the collops of prosperity appeare in thy flancke as Iob, and though thou lye upon beds of Ivorie, and stretch thy selfe upon thy cou∣ches, eating Lambes out of the flocke, and the calves out of the middest of the stall, chaunting to the sound of the viall, and inventing to thy selfe instruments of Musicke, like David, as A∣mos sayth, Chap 6. 4. Yet it shall not goe well with the wicked, hee that sowes iniqui y must reape affliction. Qui mali sunt habent mala, qui boni bona, Plaut. in Pseu∣dol. in prolog. Prov. 11. and he that soweth righteous∣nesse shall reape a sure reward; it is thy goodnesse not greatnesse, thy obsequious obedience onely holds plea in this case, Bonis, bene, ma∣lis, male. Pla∣to. though thou post thy wickednesse upon the wings of the silent night, and hide thy sinnes in the secret cavernes and subteraneous cloysters and valts of the earth, yet the Lord will search Ierusalem with a lantherne, The eyes of the Lord are upon thee, Apertio & o∣pertio occulo∣rum in deo Aug in Psal. 11 Hab. 2. 20. and his eye lids consider thy wayes, Psal. 11. 4. though he now winke and seeme to sleepe, considering with his eye lids, the crookednesse of thy wayes taking leisure and respite ere hee bring them to light, yet he goes with thee all this while (as hee did with the old world 120 yeares, and a long time with Sodome and Gomorrha) as a pub∣like notary, marking thy courses, till thou run thy selfe to perdition, then opening his eyes which seemed shut, seazing upon thee with this dierfull redargution, Psal. 50. 21. These things hast thou done, I held my tongue, thou thought∣est wickedly, that I was even such a one as thy selfe, but I will reproove thee, Scelerum pa∣tronus & ap∣probator, Mol∣ler super Psal. and set before thee, the things w ch thou hast done; all the time of Gods patience, wicked man dreames of no∣thing but peace, making God the approoving Parron of his villanies, and if hee were not ac∣knowledged, Heb. 11. 6. To be a rewarder, both of the righteous and of the wicked, rendering to the one honour, glory and immortall life, and to the other indignation, wrath, tribulation and anguish, Rom. 2. 7. hee might justly be reputed as the wicked themselves, Si deus impuni∣tos dimitteret∣malos fimilis injustorum in∣veniretur. Hai∣mo sup. Psal. 50 but it is as possible to change and alter the nature and essence of God, as for the obstinate unjust person to escape the instruments of death prepared for him, Psal. 7. 12. Even the iust shall reioyce when he seeth the ven∣gance, Psal. 58. in the performance of this truth. Consider then, what danger it is to weare the livery of disobedience, to treade upon the egges of a Cockatrice, to hatch their poysonous egges which who so eateth, dyeth, and that which is crushed, breaketh into a viper, to weave the Spi∣ders webbe, Isa. 59. 5. to have any thing to doe with the unfruifull workes of darkenesse, but to inherite shame and confusion. Be ye then like the kine of Beth-sheemosh, drawing the Arke, 1 Sam. 6. 12. though their calves lowed to them and they to their calves, yet being yoaked to the Arke they could not turne backe; so resolve with thy selfe, that though thy calves, thy brutish af∣fections cry after thee, and thy deareling sinnes like so many swarmes of Bees, troupes of be∣loved friends, Aug. lib confes∣sion. or dearest children, (as Augustine confesseth of himselfe upon his conversion from a dissolute Manichey) incompasse thee on every side for reentertainement, yet being tyed to the A ke by thy covenant of obedience, refuse, renounce, shake them off, and cast them away as Ephraim his Idols. If thou wilt needs follow thine imaginations which are evill, Gen. 6. 5. and suffer thy selfe to lye sottishly chayned in the inchaunted Castle and fooles Paradise of sinne, Pitching thy tents in the Bethaven and house of vanity, drowned in the Soporiferous Nepenthick dregs of the cyrce and bewitching corruption of thine owne heart, silencing the thoughts, and vailing the eyes both of sinne and punishment, the very visions of thy head will one day make the affraid, Dan. 4. 2 an evill conscience will be unto thee as Iobs messenger, Ioh 1. 19. a disaste∣rous nuncio to torment thee, Prov. 28. 1. cause thee to flye when no man pursueth thee, smite thee with astonishment of heart, Deu. 28. 28. Lev 26. 17 give thee the oyle of sadnesse in stead of gladnesse, cause thee to say of laughter thou art madde, when the best of thy comforts is bu from the teeth forward, Riusus. sardoni∣cus Adag. with Nero thou may est change thy chamber, but not thy chamber fel∣lowe, for the eyes which sinne hath shut, pu∣nishment doth open, the whole world of the damned sufficiently testifying, Occulos quos culpa clausit, paena aperget. Aug. as we see in Bal tazar, Dan. 5. in the time of Gods silence, what a Iolly fellow he was, God gave him a King∣dome, Majestie and honour, all Nations trem∣ble before him, he put downe and exalted whom he would, securely carrowfing with hi Queenes and his Concubines, his Princes, and proceres, in the sacred bowles of the Temple, praysing the Gods of golde and silver, but the God in whose hands his breath was, he regarded not, his coun∣sels and hests he obeved not, tell me now when his countenance ch ngeth, and his knees knocke one against another, what an unquiet house is here when his Iudge is but writing against him with a little finger, thus it is with wicked men in the time of their disobedience and Gods pati∣ence, Simile. as cold congealeth together things of quite contrary natures, as wood, stones, Iron, &c. till the fire come to dissolve them, so the soule of man hath frozen together sinnes of all sorts, and because man is Sathanically blinded, God hath appoynted the fire of his judgement to dis∣solve them, letting them see what a horrid con∣fusion, they have brought upon their owne heads, and what a confused Babel and disordered heape of enormities, they have piled and com∣piled together, against the day of wrath, the just Judge of the world is not like Phillip of Ma∣cedon, Plutarch in A∣pophtheg. who heard the poore womans cause while he slept, and so gave sentence against her, but true and just in all his sayings, whether they be Menaces or Mercies, even the word which I have spoken unto you shall judge you at the last day, Calvin super Psal. 117 Iohn 12 48. Eodem constanciae & firmitatis e∣logio, ornabitur clementia & veritas, The mercy and trueth of God are commended in the same title of constancy and stabilitie, both grounded upon himselfe; if hee be thy Master, then where is thy dutifull feare, and if thy father, then where is thy filiall obedience, Mal. 1. 6. If thou expect his promises looke to thine owne vowe, squaring thy obedience by the rule of his law, which must be thy compasse, Cynosure, and loadstarre to guide thee, to the inherritance w ch is sealed by his promises in Heaven, to be the happy portion & guerdon of all obedience, respected more than sacrifice. 1 Sam. 15, 22. Eccles. 4. 17. Hos. 6. 6. Ier. 7 22. This unmeasurable truth of God teacheth us, Vse. 3. as dutifull children in this matter to imitate the father of truth in our awfull and lawfull oathes, our promises and simple asseverations, let truth be the character and image of the inward affection of our hearts, Sermosit viva latentis affectio effigies. Calv. and our tongues the true ambassadors of our Soules, the mouth and the minde are coupled together in an holy Marriage, Math. 12. 34. Out of the aboundance of the heart the mouth speaketh; and doth a fountaine send forth at one conduit, bitter water and sweete water, Iam. 3. 11. so when the tongue speaketh that w ch the heart never thought, it is conceived in Adul∣tery, and he that bringeth forth such bastards, offends not onely the rule of charity, but in∣fringes the inviolable bond of chastity, Incomparabili∣ter, pulchrior est veritas Christianorum, quam Helena Graecorum. makes a dangerous breach in that morall verity, which is incomparably more beautifull among Christi∣ans, than the farre-admired Helena, was accomp∣ted among the Grecians, for she crownes all those that dye her Martyrs: Martyres qui pro ea viriliter ad mortem pug∣naverunt, coro∣navit. Aug. The King is strong, women is strong, wine is strong, but the truth is above all, it liveth and conquereth for evermore, 1 Esd. 4. 38. Fidelity in keeping promises, is a fruit of the Spirit, and called Faith, Gal. 5. 22. a property of him that is qualified, to dwell in Gods Taber∣nacle, and rest upon his holy Mountaine, Psal. 15. 4. It is Gods owne precept, Ephes 4. 15. Put away lying and speake truth every man to his neigh∣bour, it is our armour of proofe, able to abide the fiery tryall, to make truth our proposition, honesty our assumption, and conscience our con∣clusion. In this, wee are like to God himselfe, whose wayes are mercy and truth, hee whose soule is fraught with this, may safely with un∣daunted boldnesse, launch foorth into the depth of his enemies, set saile and direct his course to the haven of Heaven, to the father, the God of truth, Psal. 30. To the Son, which is truth it selfe, Iohn 14. 6. and to the Spirit, which is the spirit of truth, 1 Iohn 5. 6. What shall wee say then of these spurious brats of Sathan, which beare his image and super∣scription, in their lying, dissembling, false swea∣ring, undermining, ledgier-dumaine, &c. which have the deepenesse of craft in the center of their hearts, whose sinne of lying goes not alone like the Raile, Da mihi mēda∣rē & ego osten∣dam tibi surem. Erasm. but like the Partridge in covies, cou∣pled and yoaked with the Theefe, as his fittest copesmate. Zach. 5. 4. Let our Saviour CHRIST bee the Herald, to derive theyr base pedigree, and lyneall discent, Iohn 8. 44. You are of your father the Devill, he was a lyer from the beginning, so are yee, as like as one apple to another, and how ma∣ny of these Cratians, Tit. 1. 12. which are alwayes lyers, Irijahs and false accusers, Iere. 37. 13. bearing in his tongue the image of his patron, which is called, an Accuser, Rev. 12. 20. How ma∣ny covetous lying Gehezies, which beare the marke of their infamous leprosies to their graves, 2 Kings 5. 25. how many dissembling Zi∣ba's, 2 Sam. 16. 2. undermining the honest hear∣ted Mephibosheth, how many like the false and perjured Elders against the innocent Susanna, in whose gray beards, and grave heads should have shined the lustre and splendor of truth and hone∣stie, yet filled with in continency and perjury. How many of such false witnesses (as were sub∣orned against our Saviour CHRIST, Math. 26.) And those perjured wretches, which out of their venemous hearts and mouths, belched out those false accusations, and foule aspersions upon the sincere Narcissus sometime Byshop of Ierusalem, Niceph. Eccl: Hist. lib. 5. cap. 19. Al which three were shortly after rewarded with the due desert of perjury; how many of those monsters of men, who in the dayes of that Vi∣rag, the mirror of Fame of more than famous memory, Queene Eliza∣beth. have not onely multiplyed, and varia∣ted, strange and hell-bred plots, and Iesuiticall more than Italianated complots, against her Sa∣cred person, crowne and Kingdome, like those monsters in Affrica, every day a new conspiracy, but even after her death to cast the venome of their more then malicious spite upon her imma∣culate Virgin soule, that rests with her God. —Nec mors mihi finiet iras, Saeva sed in manes manibus arma dabo, It is not death can end my endlesse wrath, But Spite shall rake her ashes, Envie saith. Hence then thou sublimated malice, among the infernall Spirits, her incorruptible part is gone to God that gave it, how many of those dogged Doegs, 1 Sam. 22. How many Ananiasses and Sa∣phyraes, Acts 5. with thousands more, which like locusts, cover the surface of the Earth; is not the Starre Wormewood, fallen into the glassie Sea of this world, and hath poysoned it, the whole world lyes in wickednesse, 1 Iohn 5. 19. There is none that doth good, Apud Hypocri∣tarum sensum omnis simplici∣tas in crimine est Gregor. no not one, Psal. 14. 3. Truth is parted from the Sonnes of Men, Psal. 12. 1. Every man is a lyer, Rom. 3. 4. the abstruse Hypocrite thinkes all simplicity faulty, and truth scarce warrantable. Learne then beloved from aged Eleazer, 2 Macchab. 6 24. who going to his death because he would not eate Swines flesh, unlawfull to the Iewes profession, was counselled, for the saving of his life to dissemble & faine the eating there∣of; but he considering his age, his gray haires, his Godly education, &c. answered, It becommeth not our age in any wise to dissemble; So a Christian bearing in his crest, the Armes of Heaven, being a Knight of the conquering order of Saint Vincent, and of the red Crosse, must not defraud his bro∣ther in any matter; for God is the avenger of all such things, Three things concur in a lie, 1 Vntruth in y e matter, 2 A pur∣pose to deceive, 3 Taking plea∣sure in it. Pet. Martyr. 1 Thes. 4. 6. neither dissembling in matters of Religion, which is a capitall lye, nor in civill affaires, as being pernicious; nor in the least kinde, which may be officious; for none of these are justifiable, being layd in the ballance of Gods truth, Quisquis esse aliquid genus mendatij quod peccatum non sit, putarit seipsum decipit, Hee that thinkes any the least kinde of lye, to be no sinne, deceives himselfe, for No lye is of the truth, 1 Iohn 2. 21. for the severall kindes of lying and dissembling, Ʋide August. in Enchirid. ad laurent. reade at large, Augustine de mendacio ad consentium. Further, that wee may be drawne to love the Truth, let us consider the Iudgements of the true God against the enemies of his truth, Psal. 5. 6. He will destroy them that speake lyes, Vnum sinum cor∣dis, habet in quo videt mendati∣um alterum in quo concepit verit tem. Au∣gust. him that in the one closet of his heart, sees a dissembling lye; and in the other Cabinet conceives the Embryo of truth, Psal. 55 23 Bloody and deceitfull Men shall not live out halfe their dayes. Wisd. 1. 11. The mouth that belyeth, sleyeth the Soule. Iohn makes it a marke of Reprobation, Revel. 21. last, Whose portion is the flying Booke of Iudgements. Zach. 5 4. and Revel. 22. 15. Lyers are the blacke guests enter∣tained in the same ranke with Murtherers, Adulte∣rers, Witches, Dogs and the Divels Machivistians, which must be without, and have their portion in vtter darknesse. August. de con∣flict. vitij & virtutis. Nec artificioso mendatio nec sim∣plici verbo opertet quenquam decipere, quia quomodo libet mentitur quis occidet animam suam, We must not deceive eyther by artificiall Lying, or by pretended Simplicity, for by what meanes soe∣ver a Man doth lye, hee destroyes his owne soule. Ambrose. Turpis est omnis fraus etiam in rebus vilibus, Dissimulation in the least things is abominable. See the all-just God, justly punishing Vladislaus a Christian King of Poland and Hungarie, Knolles in his History of Tur∣kie. be∣cause hee broke a Truce, dissembling with Amu∣rath the 6. an irreligious Turke, with a great o∣verthrow of 30000. at Berna; a just revenge for perfidious dissembling: The like may be seene upon equivocating Arrius, Hist. Tripartit. lib. 3. cap. 10. who being called to the Councell of Constantinople, that there hee might renounce his Heresie, Terror eum subito ex quo∣dam conscien∣tiae secreto con∣stri xit, & cum formidine secuta est ven∣tris effusio. deceives those Fa¦thers by a paper in his bosome, in which he had written his Heresie, swearing hee beleeved as he had written, meaning (in a divelish mentall re∣servation) his hereticall position which hee kept in secret; but see the justice of God following him at the heeles, for presently after by the loos∣nesse of his Belly in the sodaine terrour of his Conscience, Ʋide Niceph. sinne lying now at the doore, hee empties his very bowels into the draught, do dogmatibus Arianorum. lib. 8 c. 7. Eccles. Hist. so ta∣king his last farewell of the world; a just judge∣ment upon perfidious Equivocators and enemies of the Truth. And I would to God, that the main∣tayners of mentall reservation cunningly contri∣ving their mixt propositions, partly mentall partly vocall, seeking hereby to delude the truth, would looke upon and consider these Examples, upholding that Monster, which no doubt was first bred and brought to light, from the darke Cells of the State-undermining Iesuits these As∣sassionates, as they have severall and sundry, ma∣ny and manifold policies; especially in the El∣ders and Fathers of that Order, See a Booke de abstrufioribus Iesuitarum stu∣dijs. as hath beene dis∣covered in their subterranious vaults in their se∣verall Colledges; so have they likewise severall Names in every new Christened Countrey, Pap. Masson. in Paulo, 410. they are Christened by a new name, called Ignatiani in Spaine, Theatin in Italy, Iesuini Campania, Scosiotti in Ferrara, Presbyteri, in St. Luciae in Bo∣nonia, reformati Sacerdotis in Mutina, with many more. And as in their names so in their natures, ambiguous; for being asked what a Iesuite is, they answere? Lib. 2. cap 17. Every Man; they have two Soules in one body, Lib. 3. cap. 26. as is confessed in their Catechisme; besides all these, and their severall projects, in themselves, —Centum adde catenas effugi∣et tamen hac sceleratum vin∣cula Proteus. Horat. and their darke Disciples, what tor∣tuous Leviathans are they in their amphibolous, amphibious, enigmaticall, ennuciations, and mungerill propositions, like so many Colour∣changing Camelions, as doubtfull as Proteus or Vertumnus: Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo? In what strong Chaine, can any tie, this Changelings face to know him by? Wee may well say of their Labyrinth-like windings, and crooked Heterogenials, as Ierome sometime spake of the darke abstruse riddles of Iovinian, Has literas ne∣mo p eter Sy∣billam legat. No man can reade these Letters except the Prophetesse Sybill, or as Martiall in the like case, None but some learned Apollo can vnfold these My∣steries, these Maeanders; Non lectore tu∣is opus est sed Apolline scrip∣tis in Pseudole. or as Plautus in the like case, Has equidem pol credo nisi Sybilla legerit, in∣terpretari alium possi neminem, Act 1. which hollow e∣quivocating hath translated vpon them, the an∣cient infamie of the Spartanes, called by Andro∣mache, Kings of Lyers; and that which Apuleius layes vpon the Scicilians triple-tongued: Siculi trilinge these be the Gibeonites, the Iebusites, the Iesuites, onely in Hypocrisie, bearing the name of IESVS, (though often shadowed under the winges, and shrowded as poysonous Vipers in the bosome of Kings) have shewed themselves, Henry, the 4. of France, slayne by the Iesuites plots, &c. to bee the onely underminers of States and Kingdomes, advan∣cing themselves by perverting the Truth against the God of truth, who will smite them for whi∣ted Walls, and painted Sepulchers; but leaving them to themselves, let us which are the chil∣dren of Light, love the Truth, and when all Ly∣ers and dissemblers shall have their portion with the Father of lyes, the Truth which maketh not ashamed shall translate us, and carry us upon his unconquered wings, from these dirty and dusty Cottages of clay into everlasting habitations, to the innumerable company of holy Angels and hie Saints for ever. Now followes the object of Gods unutterable Mercy and uncontroleable Truth, The Object. Toward vs; which though David seeme to speake in the per∣son of the Iewish Church and Nation, the Patri∣arkes and Fathers of that time, who had already, and did continually taste of his favours, though not so fully as we doe, they having in promise, wee in full performance that great mystery God manifested in the Flesh, Calcata maje∣stas, incarnata divinitas. Ber∣nard. the matriculation and in∣carnation, of our blessed Saviour IESVS CHRSIT; yet no doubt, hee had an eye vnto all succeeding Generations both of Iew and Gentile, which were Gods elect and chosen, and in time to bee brought into his Chambers, Cant. 1. 4. To be made partakers of his Mercy and Truth; as when hee stood arraigned, hee stood not in his owne place but in ours, making his personall appea∣rance on our behalfe; so in his resurrection, the whole Church arose in him, Ephes. 2. 6. hee hath raised us up together, and made us fit together, in the heavenly places in CHRIST IESVS, where we plainely see the Mercies and promises of God, Christus est ve∣ritas p tris, Ia∣cob. de valent. super locum. especially this concerning the promised seede, called The truth of the Father, were per∣formed to the fathers, before and after the flood, in the worke of redemption and salvation, and now confirmed in the same title unto us, who live after the incarnating of that immortall word from which we gather this truth. There is but one way of Salvation and Happi∣nesse to the Fathers, Doctrine. and also to us, and that by the same IESVS CHRIST. For confirmation of this, we see the unchange∣able purpose of almighty God, in gathering his Church, Hebr. 13. 8. IESVS CHRIST, yesterday to day, and the same forever, Rom. 15. 8. Now I say that IESVS CHRIST, was a Minister of the cir∣cumcision, for the truth of God to confirme the promises made unto the Fathers, Ephes. 2. 14 &c. Rev. 13, 8. The Lambe slaine from the beginning of the world, 1 Iohn 2. 7 which though manifested in the latter times, 1 Cor. 10. 3 and afternoone of the world, like a Roe or young Hart; comming skipping over the Mountaines of Bether, Cant. 2 vlt. yet all the holy Men and wo∣men from Adam, inclusively, were saved by his blood, many of which, as Noah, Isaac, Ioseph, &c. were tipes and shadowes of him, the Ceremonies and Leviticall sacrifices, tending to little other purpose, but to nourish them, in hope of the Messiah, the slaughter and death of which beasts, was to acquaint them, with the mysterie of re∣demption, which stood as under a vaile shadow∣ed in the auncient complement of the Law, Iohn 8. 56. Abraham saw my day and rejoyced, Prosuit ante∣quam fuit. Luke 1. 47. that hee might shew mercy towards our Fathers, They and wee are saved by one and the same Grace, by one and the same Faith, in one and the same Christ. Acts 26. 6. the Apostle Pauls religion, was concerning the hope of the promise made unto the Fathers, Cephas the Pillar of truth, Acts 15. 10. joyneth the Fathers faith with ours, wee beleeve even as they, so to them that lived be∣fore his Incarnation, hee was crucified in the sa∣crifices, and to us hee was likewise crucified in the word and Sacraments, Anglican. Con∣fess. art 7. Galath. 3. 1. CHRIST IESVS, evidently set forth and crucified a∣mong you, not in Roods, Masses, and Cruci∣fixes, but in his Holy and Sacred Ordinances. To confirme and teach us, in the first place, that no length of time is able to disanull, Ʋse, 10 abro∣gate, or make voyde, the counsels of the Anci∣ent of dayes, or extenuate and make lesse, the worth, efficiacie, and powerfull enargie of CHRISTS sacrifice, the same which was Preach∣ed to Adam in Paradise, Gen. 3. 15. promised to Abraham and David, and the Church of the Iewes, foretold by all the Prophers concerning CHRIST belōgs to us; by faith they looked upon CHRIST as up to the Serpent in the wildernesse, Iohn the 3. 14 as he was to bee crucified, by faith wee looke upon him as he is crucified, like the two Cherubins, at the two ends of the Mercie-seate. having their faces one toward another, and both upon the Arke, Exod. 25. 18. So the age primi∣tive which is past, and all our after-gatherings of all-measuring Time, looke either on either, and both upon CHRIST, there is no other way, nor hath or can be Salvation in any other, Acts 4. 12. Secondly, Ʋse, 2. it serves to comfort every true belee∣ver though never so base, dejected, rejected, dispi∣sed, and dispited, though he lye among the pots, Psal. 68. 13. or behind the Ewes with young, Psal 78. 72. though hee be Lord and Master of few or none of these outward things, as Lazarus, Luke 16 yet is he by CHRIST, called to the same Salvation, admitted into the same fellowship, made partaker of the same Heaven, with those auncient worthies, Mat 8 11. sitting downe with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, in the Kingdome of happinesse. The contrary whereof, viz. a deprivation and losse of that Heavenly Vision, called by the Schoolemen Pena damni, Damnati sci∣ent gloriam be∣atorum, sed so∣lum in confuso. is an aggravation of the misery, and materiall poynt of the torments of the damned, Luke 13. 28. Yee shall see Abraham, Isaac, S ella sup Luc. cap. 13. and Iacob, and all the Prophets, in the King∣dome of God, thou mayest justly heere, say with David (being the man whom the King will ho∣nour) 1 Sam. 18. 18. in the acknowledgement of Gods free mercy and truth toward thee? Who am I? and what is my life? or my fathers fami∣ly in Israel? that I should be not onely sonne in law, but even lawfull heire to the King of Kings, to enjoy the same glory with those famous Patri∣arks and Worthies; what shall then become of all those, that neglect so great Salvation, who be∣ing invited to this heavenly banquet, of mortall Ambrosicall junckets, do still lie groveling in the myeric and nastie sinkes of Iniquity, eating the filthy dust of the earth with the Serpent, Gen. 3. 14. selling themselves with Ieroboa , to doe wickedly, soules and bodies with Esau to hell, for a messe of Pottage, or with Demas for a few of the transitory temporals of the world; but if wee expect the same happinesse with the Fathers, wee must go the same way, and tread in the same steps, not expecting to enjoy the poysonous pleasures of sinne, and the felicity of Gods cho∣sen, with Moses, Heb. 11. 25. refusing to be called the sonne of Pharaoes daughter, chusing rather to suffer affliction, with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasure of sinne for a season, e∣steeming the rebuke of CHRIST, greater riches then the pleasures of Egypt, for he had respect un∣to the recompence of reward, knowing if he had the one he must misse the other; thus our Savi∣our CHRIST endured the Crosse, dispised the shame for the joy that was set before him, Heb. 12. 2. Thus the Christian Hebrewes, in the Pri∣mitive Church suffered with ioy the spoyling of their goods, the reason is rendered, they knew in themselves that they had in Heaven a better and more enduring substance, Heb. 10. 37. or as Da∣vid, Psal. 106 5. That I may see the good of thy cho∣sen and reioyce with thine inheritance. Heere is propounded vnto thee, that double pathway of Hercules, Hercules hivi∣um. the one the straight foot∣path of Vertue, which ascending may seeme hard and difficult: Non est a terris mollis ad astra via: Faire vertues war, hard and vneasie is, that leades from Earth to endlesse happinesse. The other is broad, easie, and even, which is the inchanted way of sinfull pleasure: Facilis discensus Averni: Virgil. Aeneid. 6. The often-troden path of filt hy Vice, is easie, plaine, and leades from Paradice. Thus tracing the Patriarkes in the footing of holy Duties, Religion and Pietie, there is layd vp for thee, a Crowne of immortality; but traver∣sing thy steps, in the pleasing wayes of voluptu∣ousnesse, thou shalt be sure to finde nothing, but horrid paines, tumultuous horror, fiery chaines, scorching darknesse, tormenting Divels, and a full draught of the scalding Cup of the vnmea∣surable wrath of an angry incensed and reven∣ging God, who is a consuming Fire. Heb. 12. 29. Seeing the Fathers received the Promises as∣suredly having the mercies of God, Ʋse 3 confirmed and performed vnto them by their Faith, Heb. 11. 33. even to their severall deliverances, even that from Babels Captivity, which long expected in∣largement, was vnto them as a dreame, Psal. 126. 1. and preventing his servants, beleeving on him, as David, with blessings abundantly, Psal. 21. 3. So will hee deale with vs, if wee have Faith, Ephes. 3. 20. For hee is able to doe for vs exceeding a∣bundantly, above all that we aske or thinke, pro∣mising to heare our Prayers, even while we aske or speake; as hee did with Cornelius, Act. 10. 4. or Daniel, chap. 9. 23. While they are yet speaking I will heare, Isa. 65. 24. So by Faith wee must re∣ceive the Promises. Hence wee see the apparent reason and cause, why so many, after so long Preaching of the Word, receiving the Sacraments, and frequen∣ting Gods holy ordinances (which he hath made as the instruments, to worke and nourish Faith in vs, and the Conduit-pipes to convey his Graces unto us,) doe still receive so little profit, remay∣ning obdurate, and hardened in prophanenesse, Idolatry, ignorance, &c. and are not healed of the sinne-wounds of their Soules, nor obedient to the heavenly vocation, that the Minister may justly take vp his complaint with the Prophet, I have laboured in vaine, and spent my strength in vaine. Isa. 49. 4. When men goe from the word of Exhortati∣on, as Caine from Gods owne admonition, Gen. 4. 7. Worse then hee came; or, as Iudas from CHRIST, fuller of Sathan than before, Ioh. 13. 27. Our hearts are not opened, Act. 16. 14. Our eares not boared, our eyes not illuminated; but like the deafe Adder, or like the poore Begger, wan∣ting his hands, Simile. that hee can receive no almes; or like an empty vessell cast into the Sea, which can receive no liquor, because the orifice is shut. E∣ven so vnbeliefe, frustrates the promises of God, wee may aske, pray, and receive nothing; be∣cause wee want Faith, Iam. 1. 6. the Word is vnpro∣fitable vnto vs: For, because of the vnbeliefe CHRIST did but few Miracles in Galilee, the two Olive branches cannot emptie the Golden∣oyle out of themselves, through the two golden pipes, because they are stopped, Zach. 4. 12. And this is that which Sathan once strove to bring our Saviour CHRIST unto, to distrust the provi∣dence of God, Math. 4. 3. causing the stones to be made bread; and this is that, by which he works upon the weaknesse of man, to distrust Gods care over him, bringing him by this meanes, to the shame of stealing, fit ' . and from this distrust, even to the height of Apostacy, Heb. 3. 12. for this God will de∣stroy us, Vnbeleevers placed in the vantgard of the cursed. Iudeth, 5. Let us then, 2 Cor. 7. 1. seeing we have such promises, not loose the performance of them through unbeleife, taking heede least at any time, Revel. 22. 8. there be in any of us an evill heart of unbe∣liefe, Heb. 3. 12. but learne to say with the man in the Gospell, Marke 9 24. I beleeve, Lord helpe my vnbeliefe, and with the Disciples, Luke 17. 5. Lord increase our Faith, and if oppressed with deadnesse of heart, stirre up our faith with David, Psal. 42. 11. Why art thou cast downe my soule, and why art thou so disquieted within mee, for he that beleeveth shall not make hast. Isa. 28. 16. saith maketh not ashamed, Sub Clypeo fi∣dei & subfidio virtutis. Isa 26. The iust man shall live by his faith, Hab. 2. 4. All things are possible to the beleever, he may remoove mountaines, he is an omnipo∣tent creature, as Barnard sayth, Phil. 4. 13. I can doe all things, by faith thou receivest the pro. mises, thine eternall life and happinesse, have their dependance thereon, Iohn 3. 16. hee that be∣leeveth in the Sonne hath everlasting life, but if yee will not beleeve, ye shall not be established, Isa. 7. 9. Seeing this Mercy and truth of God is confir∣med, and upon our faith so assured toward us, Ʋse 4. that it cannot be frustrate, as it hath served to comfort us, so now it serves to confute and con∣found that uncomfortable Antichristian princi∣ple, bred in Popery, strongly affirmed, confirmed cannonized, Concil. Trident Sess. 6. cap. 9. Canon, 13. 16. and ratified by the counsell of Trent, prop and pillar of that cursed Idolatrie of the Beast, agreed upon by those Italianated Machia∣vels, viz. that A man must doubt of his Salvation so long as he lives, as much as if one should say, wee must doubt, of what God hath promised in his mercy or ratified in his truth, confirmed by oath, and sealed unto us in the blood of his Son, by the witnesse of the Spirit, Rom 8. 16. 1 Iohn 5 10. Eph. 4. 30. making them all of none effect? what is this, but to beleive the father of lyes, be∣fore the three witnesses in Heaven, and the three in earth, 1 Iohn 5. 7. What is this, but to teach the sinne of Infidelity, which above the rest, is like the fourth beast, Dan. 7. 7. dreadfull, terrible, ex∣cedding strong, and had great Iron teeth, this e∣ven pushed against the truth of God, with the hornes of blaspemie? What is this, but to set a mans conscience upon the racke? and to give in∣to the hands of a desperate man, swords, Pistols, halters, the engines of his owne destruction, and even to cause the hands in this distraction of minde, in this deepe poynt of Salvation, to imbrue themselves in their owne blood, as ne∣ver being sure of Gods mercy and truth towards him, in the pardoning and forgiving his sinnes, when he can never by the doctrine of his Religi∣on, say with David, I put my trust in the Lords mercy, nor with Thomas, my Lord, and my God, nor with the faithfull, Isa. 25. 9. Loe this is our God, wee have waited for him, but his soule perplexed∣ly hangeth tottering betwixt hope and dispaire. Consider with Augustine, Nomen sub quo nemini despe∣randum est. that the name of IESVS, is a name under which wee must not dispaire, Augustin. Moritur Chri∣stus pro indige∣nis pro indignis. hee spreads his armes on the Crosse to imbrace both Iewe and Gentile; Deus tibi de hoc mundo recedenti promisit immortalitem, & tu dubi∣tas? hoc est Deum omnino non nosse, Augustin. Christum cre∣dentium Magistrum peccato incredulitatis offendere, God hath promised thee immortality, when thou goest out of the world, and doest thou doubt? What is this but not to know God, and to offend CHRIST, Ciprianus de mortalitate. the Master of the faithfull, with the sinne of Infidelity, the mercifull God hath shed abroad his love in our hearts, that hee might beget and bring forth our love to him a∣gaine, from the reflection of his owne, Amor Dei a¦morem Deo pa∣rit. Bernard. non credit in deum qui non in eo solo collocat totius suae foelicita∣tis fiduciam, he beleeves not in God, who puts not the trust of his whole felicity (for this life and a better) onely in him. What a comfortlesse doctrine is this, which strives to blinde the eyes of faith, Ciprian. de dupl. martyrio. CHRIST came to preach no such, hee was preached by the An∣gels, to be a Gospell, and glad tydings of great Ioy to all people, Luke 2. 10. and Zach. 6. 12, Re∣ioyce O daughter Sion, for thy King commeth unto thee, &c. wee must reioyce in him as men doe in harvest. Isa. 7. which wee cannot doe, so long as the doctrine of our religion, teacheth us to doubt of Gods mercy and truth, cheare up thy selfe then, performing thine obedience, not from the spirit of meere bondage, but with David, Psal. 119 chearefully runne the wayes of Gods comman∣dements, make thine election, peace, and re∣conciliation, sure in CHRIST, and be∣ing iustified thou hast peace with God, by faith; Rom. 5. 1. The fourth and last thing considerable in the reason, Conclusion. is the conclusion of the Psalme, the first & last string of this well tuned Harpe, beginning and ending in the same cadence of an holy and heavenly duety, Praise yee the Lord. Which are considered two wayes,— 1 As they are repeated, 2 As a duty enjoyned. First, Repetitions u∣sed diversly. wee see here not an idle Crambe bis cocta, but a necessary repetition, warranted by the Spi∣rit which indited it, and David that writ it; where obserue, that repetitions are used in the Scriptures in divers respects. Sometime in pray∣er, for the better stirring up of our zeale and fer∣vency thus used by CHRIST himselfe, Math 26 39. 42. and chap. 27. 46. My God, my God, and Psal. 143. 1. Sometime in matters of Prophec , and that most usually in the Coetaneall and Pro∣phets of the same time, as in Amos, Isa, and Hosea, the same vices, the same false Prophets, and the same Idolatry is taxed, Mich 1. 3. the same vices in the same words with Isa 26. 21. and the same concerning the mountaine of the Lord, Isa. 2. 2. hath Mich 4. 1. And not onely among them of the same time, but also of many ages and genera∣tions distant, Post captivita∣tem Babiloni∣cam. as Iacobs Prophecy, Gen. 49. 10. re∣peated many hundred yeares after, Hag. 2. 8. Zach. 2. 8. borrowes that from Psal. 17. 8. and the like, Zach 9. 9 from Isa 62 11. so Zach 9. 10. from Psal. 72. 8 and Zach. 11. 9. from Ierem. 15. 2. The promise concerning the powring out of the Spirit of grace, Zach. 12. 10. from Ioel. 2. 28, the destruction of the Idols which is threatned, Zach. 13. 2. from Ezech, 30. 13. All these to settle our faith in the certainty of the Scriptures in this united concordance and harmony of the writers thereof, all agreeing in the Analogy of faith, like Pharaohs dreame repeated, Mercer super Gen. Gen 41, 32. to make him know it was established with God, and hee will surely bring it to passe. Sometime they are used in simple narrations, to assure the beleever of the certainty of them, as 1 Iohn that which wee have heard from the beginning which wee have seene and handled &c. To this end the God of nature, hath given unto man two hands, two eares, two eyes, that if the one faile in the ob∣ject, the other should not, or to put us in minde, with an earnest desire to performe our duties, which brings us to the doctrine, Doctrine. viz. Repititions are not alway vaine Battalogies and superfluous Tantologies, Ʋerba totius inculcata, vera sunt, vita sunt, sana sunt, plana sunt. Aug. de a∣dulterijs conju∣gijs ad Pol. lib. 2 cap. 4. but often times lawfull and warrantable, for the better stirring men up to their duties. The Prophet Isa desires for the teaching of knowledge to them that are wayned from the milke and drawne from the breasts, Chap. 28. 10. Precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a little and there a little, Phil 3. 1. It greiveth not the Apostle to write the same things unto them, and Iude, 5. I will put you in remembrance, though you once knewe this, &c. There is no newe thing under the Sunne, Nibil dictum quod non dictū prius. Terent. saith the Preacher, nothing spoken which hath not formerly bin upon the Stage, what are the Prophets, but Expositors of Moses the great Prophet, the new Testament of the olde, and our Sermons Comments upon both. Men under the Gospell must be like the cleane beasts under the law of Ceremonies, to chew the cud in in an holy meditating and repeating of things taught and delivered for their good. Reason, Reas. 1. 1. because of the dulnesse of Mans ap∣prehension, and his memories weaknesse in re∣tension, Numquam sa∣tis dicitur, quod non satis dicitur, D. Hū∣phrey in prefa∣tione partis. 1 Iesuitismi. those lively powers and faculties of the Soule, superiour and inferiour, being so craysed and broken by the fall, Ephes. 4. 38. our cogitati∣tions darkened and estranged from the life of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The naturall man understandeth not the things of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5. He thinkes, nor can thinke of himselfe a good thought, Rom. 8. 7. hee submits not, nor can submit to the law of God, Phil. 2. 13. he wills not, nor can will things ple sing to God, Luke 13. 11. Hee hath a Spirit of infirmity, &c. so that viewe him in his naturals, and they are meere privations, a mixture and composition, whose ingredients are weaknesse and frailety, which causeth us to stand in neede, to have things often repeated, that they may leaue the better impression behinde them. The learned Doctor of the Gentiles, dealt so plainely, that he dares affirme both to the learned and ig∣norant, 2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospell bee hid, it is hid to them that perish; to this end the Minister is cal∣led a Nurse, 1 Thes. 2. 7. which halfe cheweth meate, ere she give it to her child, and in teach∣ing it to speake, to the right framing of its vocall Arteries, doth of ten (Parrat-like) repeate the same words; so must we as Babes, chewe, eate and disgest, the root of our instruction. Ionas Sermon was the same for three dayes together, Yet forty dayes and Ninivie shall be destroyed, Iona. 3. 4. As mea e from the mouth is commended to the Liver and Stomach, Simile. then to the more tender and slender inwards in the first Concoction, next the nutritive, Kecker lib 3 Phyfi. cap. 12 being segregated from the excre∣mentitious parts; in the second concoction, it is committed to the Mesaraicke veynes, and thence in the third concoction, dispierced secretly tho∣row the conduits of the outward veynes to eve∣ry part of the body, nourishing the blood, arte∣ries, sinewes, flesh, &c. Even so the Word of God must bee committed to the outward eare, then to the intellectuall parts, thence to the heart and so to worke upon the will and the affecti∣ons, as to pull downe every imagination and high thing, that exalteth it self against the know∣ledge of God, by little and little to bring them into subjection, to the obedience of CHRSIT; which is not done all at once, but by working the Eare to like, the Memory to retayne, and the Heart to digest. Heere are instructions; Vse . first, for the Minister, than for the People; For the Mini∣ster. the Minister who is Gods mouth, and Messenger vnto the people, must not onely teach new things and vnknowne, but also epeat and bring to remembrance, things old and knowne, Plaine Preach∣ing the b st. beating upon the same nayle, to drive it the deeper, and make it the faster; and for this let the Apostle Peter bee our warrantable pat∣terne, Iude, a briefe of the second Epistle of Pet. and Marke, a compendium of Math. &c. 2. Pet 1. 12. I will not bee negligent to put you alway in remembrance of these things, though you know them, and verse 13. I thinke it meete so long as I am in this Tabernacle to stirre you vp by put¦ting you in remembrance; Divines had in all ages theyr introductions to Religion, as Clemens Alex∣ no inus his Paed gogus, La¦ctantius his In∣stitutions, Ci il his Ca ichis∣mes, August: his Enchiridion &c. and for this end, hee writes this second Epistle, Chap. 3. 1. So Timothy must stirre up the gui t of God in him, 2 Tim. 1. 6. Least those guifts should lye dead in him, and give no light, as fire under many afhes; So though thy re∣petitions be thought penurious and poore, yet will they stirre up the dulnesse of the memory and understanding, and this thy plainnesse (if in the evidence of the Spirit) is the way to save them that beleeve, 1 Cor. 1. 18. called, The Preach∣ing of the Crosse, openly and plainely crucifying CHRIST before your eyes, Gal. 3. 1. describing him in your sight, as it were painted upon your wals. This is that two edged sword dividing be∣twixt the marrow and the bones, Heb. 4. 12. That true prophecying, which judgeth men, discove∣ring the thing of the heart, causing them to say, The Lord is within you, 1 Cor. 14. 25. This is the mighty Scepter in CHRISTS mouth, by which he smites the Nations, conquers the prophane∣hearted Gentiles, Isa. 11. 4. That which shaketh heaven and earth, Hag. 2. 5. all other are unsavo∣ry, humane, and small more of the pride of the flesh, than of the Grace of the Spirit. Which serves to shew what mettle wee are of, which like the Pharisees out of Moses chayre, hunting after the vaine breath of Mans praise, more than the true rewarding praise of God, Obs urum per aeque obscurum. Iohn 12. 41, soare in such an Eagles pitch upon the wings of humaine Rhetorique, and the darke ab∣struse mysteries of Schoole-invention, that wee wrap up CHRIST, and the way of Salvation in such swadling bands, Herculian knots, inextrica∣ble nice distinctions and Sphinxicall riddles, that Oedipus himselfe, might stand amazed, and the Disciples in astonishment might say, What meane these things? Like many of those 38 Expositers upon Aqui∣nus, leaving him as darke as they found him, where we see little else but Tomes upon Tomes; what is this, but the pollicy of Sathan, working in the swelling wisdome of the flesh, to obscure the way to Heaven, this was not the precept of God, Ier. 15 19. Thou must not turne to the peo∣ple, Ap anon alta. but they to thee, nor approved of our Savi∣our CHRIST, Bernard. Iohn, 5. 44. Yee believe not, because yee seeke glory one of another, nor Pauls practise, Gal. 1. 10. Doe I preach God or man? or seeke 1 to please men? &c. and 1 Cor. 14. 19. I had rather speake five words in the Church by my understanding, that by my voyce I might teach others, then ten thou∣sand words in an unknowne tongue; empty thy selfe then of this thy Delphick obscurity, let thy Trumpet give a certaine sound, least thou shut up the Kingdome of Heaven with the Pharisees, and neither enter thy selfe, nor suffer them that would enter. Vse. 2. To teach the people to bee content to heare the same things repeated, For the People. and to be fedde more than once with the same kinde of meate, while thou art a Babe in the old, thou must not desire newe, and as the Minister must not gild and blanch over, the word of God to please thy hu∣mor, Hottaman in his treatise of the Embassa∣dor. and as a good Embassadour, of whom a Lawyer speaketh, must not be like a Stage Play∣er, to change his person, but constantly stand to the will and pleasure of his King and Master, and must not say with Issachar, Gen 49. 14 Ease is good but must feede the flock whereof the Holy Ghost hath made him over-seer, Act. 20. 28. and feed the lambes if hee love Christ, Iohn 20. 17. Giving to every one his portion in due season, and that in that evidence and plaine demonstration of the Spirit; so thou art to heare, Est natura ho∣minum novita∣tis avida. Plin. not as in the exchange, onely strange∣newes from forraigne Nations, or as those newg fangled Athenians, but putting off this itchinr∣humor, here to have thy understanding infor∣med, thy will reformed, and thy life conformed to the lawes of God, and thine obedience per∣formed unto CHRIST, that the word may work alteration to purifie thee, mollifie and open thy heart, convert thy soule, season thee with grace, dissolve the workes of darknesse, heale thy wounds of sinne, make thee fit for Hea∣ven. And here come justly to be taxed, besides those convicted Recusants, who have shaken off the yoke of obedience, and (given theyr names to the Beast) all those that negligently frequent the congregation, accompting more of losse and dung, of ease, pleasure and profit, then of the Word, which is able to turne Wolves into Lambes, Sinners into Saints, Isa. 11. 6. A congre∣gation gathered together in the Church, Tertullian in Apolog. sayth the father, Are like an armie of fighting men, ar∣med by prayer and prayses against the spirituall enemies of their soules, where the word offers it selfe to be thy loadstarre, to CHRIST, thy Iacobs staffe to scale Heaven, thy lantherne to light, and the heavenly Manna, to feed thy soule, in which place, and upon which ordinance, CHRIST pro∣miseth a blessing, My house shall be called the house of Prayer, and where two or three are gathered toge∣ther in my name, there am I in the midst of them; take a patterne of the servants of God, the primitive Church, Acts 2. 46. the Prophetesse Anna, Luke 2. 37. and the Church in St. Augustins time, w ch he compares to Ants, because they were alway about the Church, as the Ant is about her hole or home; and let not God for this negligence, de∣prive thee of his Grace, and bring upon thee that fearefull curse, I desinenter maledicite. lu∣nius. Trewel. which is due to those which doe his worke either negligently or not at all, Iudg 5. 23. Curse yee Meroh, said the Angell of the Lord, Curse yee bitterly the inhabitants thereof, be∣cause they came not to the helpe of the Lord against the mighty. The second sort, 2 In Morall. are not negligent commers, but heedlesse hearers, hearing line upon line, but returning without profit, the Scripture, sayth Gregory the great, is like a River, in which the Lambe may wade, and the Elephant swim; or like an Apothecaries shop, in which are Potions, and Pils, Corrasives and Cordials, fit for every occasion, Homil. 24. in Act. for every disease; but as Chrisostome sayth, when the Minister prayeth or preacheth, one walketh, another talketh, another sleepeth, while the Divell rocketh him in his cradle, like Ionah securely in the sides of the Ship, in the middest of the tempest, without profit or desire to be instructed, returning as a doore upon the hinges, at night in the morning station; whereas the word should be as the laver of Brasse, to Aa∣r n and his Sonnes, to wash thee withall, Exod. 30. 18. and thou shouldest bee with the servant in the law, boared in thine eare, Exod. 21. 6. Thy flesh circumcised, thy heart instructed, the fal∣low ground ploughed and broken up, Ierem. 4. 4. The soule hammered, Ier. 23. 29 and thou wholy framed, as a signet fitted for a mans right hand, Ier. 22. 24. When this axe is layd to the roote of the tree, Math. 3. 10. take heed then to thy feete when thou enterest into the house of God, Eccles. 5. 1. least in the end, thou be taken for an unpro∣fitable servant, and in the fearefull case of Ierusa∣lems negligence, and heedlesnesse, How often would I have gathered thee, as a hen her chickens, and yee would not, Math. 23. 37. A third sort are such, as are displeased with what they heare; like the Mule, kicking the dam, that feedes them; or like undutifull children at every angry word, casting dirt and myer in the face of their Parents; or like these Apes, which breake every looking glasse, because it shewes their deformities, whose galled backes, or rather unsound consciences, no sooner feele the Aqua-Fortis of reproofe, but presently as Ahab with E∣lija, they accompt their Minister their enemie, 1 Kings 21. 20. or as the same Ahab spoke of Mi∣chajah, He never Prophecies good unto mee, 1 Kings 12. 8. And for all this, what hath the righ∣teous done? How hath the Minister offended thee, when he wounds thy selfe-love, and the pride of thine heart, and when with the axe of the word, hee is hewing and fitting thee as a lively stone for Gods building; wee see in the Law, Deut. 19. 5. If a man hewing timber in the wood, should by chance let his axe fall from the helue and hurt a man, hee was to goe to a Citty of refuge for his safety? Why should it not then pleade the pardon of thy Pastor, when by chance, by the sword of the Spirit hee rubbs thy galled sores, touches thy Dalilah, thy Herodias, thy most beloved sinnes, and tels thee plainely, Thou must not have thy brothers wife, thou must leave her, or leave thy Heaven and hap∣pinesse. Consider further that every man being as a brand taken forth of the fire, all the Placentia plea∣sing words, comforts, and cordials, cannot cure him, till he be lashed with Moses, and driven out of himselfe into CHRIST, let not then the poy∣sonous love of sin, stop thine eares, causing thee to say of it, as Abraham of Ismael, Gen. 17. 18. O that Ismael, my carnall pride & prophainnesse might live in thy sight; or conceit of it, as Lot of Zoar, Gen. 19. 20. Is it not a little one? Such a sinne is but a peccadillo, a little one, a small oath, an offici∣ous lye, a sleight excuse, these are with thee, but small matters, whereas thou must give an ac∣compt of every idle word, the Divell, like a cun∣ning Nimrod and hunter, spreads his nets of plea∣sure, profit, selfe-love, &c. To drive thee out of love with the word, to esteeme it base, or need∣lesse, and so to banish it as the Gargasites did CHRIST, or troublesome, and contrary to thy peace, as Amazia, Amos, 7 12. Goe thou Seer and flye into the Land of Iuda, So moralized by Gregorie, l. 1 cap. 5. pastor. curae. and there eate bread and prophecie; but know beloved, as in the Law of Moses, Deut. 25. The elder brother dying, the younger was to marry his widdow, so to rayse up seede unto his deceased brother, so by prea∣ching, and teaching, reproving, and exhorting, must the Minister (as a younger brother) unto CHRIST; he is the Embassadour in CHRISTS stead, to wooe and winne men to be reconciled with God, 2 Cor. 5. 18. Suffer then the words of exhortation and reproofe, rejoyce with Zacheus Luke 19. 9. Because Salvation is come to thine house, let the word win thee, that thy Minister by thy profiting, in the carefull discharge of his office, may answer unto God, having brought Beniamin backe, Iohn 17. 12. Of all those whom thou hast given mee, I have not lost one. Secondly, The second consideration. consider these repeated words, as they containe and enjoyne a duty to be perfor∣med, Hallelu jah, wee saw it in the portall of the text, and finde it againe in the end (as it were reviving a duty, which is and hath beene, forgot∣ten of so many, in praising God for his manifold mercies and truth, continued from him the Crea∣tor to the creature, in creating, preserving, main∣taining, spirituall and temporall protection, with the sending of CHRIST for our redemption, where we see, two things, 1 The matter of the du∣ty. 2 The manner. The matter to be performed, The matter. is Thankesgiving, commanded Psal. 50. 15. 1 Thes. 5. 18. Confir∣med unto us, in the practice of Gods children, Exod. 15. 1. 2. Iudg. 5. 1. Luke 1. 68. And as it be∣commeth Saints to be obedient, so to be thanke∣full, Psal. 33. 1. The Israelites are upbraided with the contrary, 2 Chron. 32. 25. and Hezechia rende∣red not againe, according to the benefit done unto him, for his heart was lifted up; therefore the wrath of God, was upon him, upon Iuda, and Ie∣rusalem. The unthankefull person is not worthy of the bread which he eates, Non est dignus dandis qui non agit gratis pro datis. Greg. he is unworthy to be rewarded, which returnes not thankes for the reward, In vitat ad magna, qui gra∣tanter suscipit modica. cass. this causeth God, to shut up hea∣ven against us, making it Brasse above us, and the earth Iron under us, Epist. 4 whose hardnesse and unsea∣sonable fructifying, may sufficiently convince us of unthankefulnesse, he stops up the channels of his love, and the boundlesse streames of his fa∣vours; because our hearts are dammed up with Ingratitude; Cessat cursus gratiarum ubi cessit recur sus. he would have open thankes for se∣cret mercies, Bern. ser. 35 on Cant. as Rivers come from the Sea, close∣ly through the cranies and silent p ssages of the earth, but returne ope ly, giving manifest notice of their thankefulnesse to the God of the Sea, all being his owne. Gratiā gratia parit. Sophocl. in Oedip. Hag. 2. 9. No benefit but should bee the mother of thankes, Colos. 3. 15. What can wee either thinke, or speake, or write, which may be more acceptable to God, then Thankes∣giving, s th divine Augustine? What can be spo∣ken more briefly, In Epistola ad Marcellinum. heard more chearefully, under∣stood more joyfully, or done more fruitfully, it is the Musicke which Saints and Angels make in heaven, Rev, 5. 9. and 19. 1. 3. and should be the burthen of all our mirth; it is salt to season all our sacrifices, the want whereof, God will not dispence withall, Ingratū si dixe. ris omni dix∣eris Ingratum fi amas, nihil a∣mas. Plaut. in Psa. Ephes. 5. 20. Giving thankes in all things, at all times, and by all meanes; the contrary hath beene condemned, as the poyson∣ing of a vipor, not only in the Schoole of Grace, but even in the Academie of Nature; an ingrate∣full person, to be a short Epitomie of all odible, and avoy dable things, Rom. 1. 18. Collos. 2. 7. 1 Tim. 5. 4. 2 Tim. 3. 2. as one unworthy to parti∣cipate of any mans love. Then praise the Lord O my Soule, and be not unmindfull of any of his bene∣fits &c. Psal. 102. To stirre up our hearts to a conscionable per∣formance of this duety, Ʋse, 1. hee that Gulon-like, de∣voures Gods blessings, even to the eating of his daily food without giving thankes, Gen. 31. 1 eates not to God▪ Rom. 14. 6, lives not to God but to his bel∣ly, Gen. 40. 23 Exod. . 8 Exod. 17. 3 is like Pharaohs butler to Ioseph, Laban to Ia∣cob, Iudas to CHRIST, the new Pharaoh to the Israelites, and the Israelites to God: how can we be thus unmindfull of him, that howerly is so mindfull of us? let our tongues cleave to the roofe of our mouthes, and with the father of Iohn Baptist, be dombe, let us be beasts with Na∣buchadnezar, till we learne in a thankfull remem∣brance to acknowledge the most high; let us pe∣rish with ingrateful Ierusalem, Chorazin and Beth∣saida, Sodome and Gomorrha; If it were so punished in the poore Gentiles, having onely the purblind light of Nature to guide them, onely reading their lessons in the darke volume of the Creatures, to be given up to strange sinnes and strange Iudgements, Rom. 1. 21. for their Ingra∣titude? what shall then become of us, which have not onely that, but the day-light of the Scrip∣ture, and of the Spirit? Doe wee so requite the Lord, O stubborne and unthankfull generation that we are, CHRIST condemnes it with admiration, in the ten Leapers, Interrogatio sit in detestatio∣nem vitij ingra∣titudinis Stella super cap. 17. Luc. Luke 17. 17. Are there not ten cleansed? We do not wonder at ordinary things, because every day obvious, but we are amazed at a Centaure or Monster, at any thing deficient or superfluous in Nature, because extraordinary; So wee doe not admire the ordinary sinnes of men, Ignotum invi∣sum & vitium maxime repug∣ua s naturae. because wee see them daily; but wee gaze at an ingratefull person, because hee is hatefull, and almost unknowne to Nature it selfe. Stella ibidem. It was a Custome among the Romaines, That if a Servant made free, became vnthankfull, to bee adiu ged to his pristine bondage. GOD from time to time, to moove us to this Dutie, hath caused his Mercies to bee kept in remembrance, as a pot of Manna in the Arke, and also the frag∣ments of his miraculous banquet, Iobn 6. &c. Bee not then like churlish Nabal, like Horse or Mule, that have no understanding, but let thy tongue, that so long hath beene mute and silent, become the well-tuned Cymball of prayse, and the silver trumpet of Thankesgiving; this is thy Heauen upon earth, and when the Word, Pray∣er, Faith, and Hope, shall cease, it shall remaine, Blessing and Honour, might and Thankesgiving, be unto our God for evermore. Revel. 7. 12. Having finished the matter, The m ner of praising God. which is both the prescript and postscript, the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and ending of this Psalme; let us see in the last place, the manner how this dutie must be performed, and layd downe, Collos. 3. 16. Teaching and admonishing one another in Psalmes and Hymnes, and Spirituall songs, singing with Grace in your hearts to the Lord. Where note: First, that the service of God, among Chri∣stians, is not a sad, dull, melancholique, and so∣litary kind of life, but full of joy and myrth. Secondly, a Monasticall and Heremiticall life, condemned. Thirdly, that there is an excellent use of sing∣ing Psalmes. And lastly, to what end, with the uses. First, against which it hath beene long object∣ed, by the whole Colledge of the professors of prophainnesse, that in Religion, there is no mirth but only deepe lumpish melancholy to be found; here we see the contrary, and that euen under the law, Spiritus Calvi∣nianus est spiri∣tus melancho ∣cus. which might seeme the saddest time of Gods service, yet was it performed in the Temple with Organes and Instruments of most ravish∣ing m sicke, which as yet did but shadow to us, and give a taste of that great joy, which after∣wards should follow under the Gospell, Which is glad tidings of great ioy, Luke 2. 11. first chaun∣ted and tuned, by those heavenly Choristers, the Angels, the like in every service, Psal. 2. 11. Serve the Lord with feare, and reioyce with trem∣bling, Psal. 95. 1. O come let us sing unto the Lord, let us reioyce to the rocke of our Salvation; cheare∣fulnes and thanksgiving, is required in all things. Goe thy way then, eate thy bread with joy, and drinke thy wine with a merry heart, for God ac∣cepteth thy cheerefulnesse in thy workes, let thy garments be alway white, and let thy head want no oyntment, Eccles. 9. 7. Wee see indeed, the man that lookes through the spectacles of Nature, soaring upon the laging wings of earth, sees no further or higher then earths happinesse, cannot rejoyce in Gods mer∣cy, in electing, adopting▪ &c. or any other things spirituall (which are and ought to bee, the dittie of all our musicke) because they are to him, no more then parables, or paradoxes, but he joyeth rather in carnall things, which though they con∣tent the flesh, they crucifie CHRIST, and grieve the Spirit, like foole-drunken Nabal in his feasts, 1 Sam. 25. 26. or Belshazzar, I olatrously car∣rowsing, Dan. 5. 2. making himselfe merry with Sacriledge, or like effiminate Heliogabalus, the helluo who in his feasts to make himselfe merry withall, had eight bald-pated guests, as many lame, as many blinde, as many bleer-eyed, as ma∣ny gouty, as many deafe, &c. which he called his make-sports, and mirth movers. Or to rejoyce in Scurrilous jeasting; baudy songs, which are not urbane and civill, but beastly and irreligious, set∣ting us in as great danger as Iobs children, disho∣nouring both God and our festivall merr ments; or as the covetous money-monger, who locks up his God, his ioy, in his chest, and in the comfort of his heart, worships it every morning, with his o∣rysons, as the Persians the Sun, or the inhabitants of Calecut, the Div ll; or rejoycing with the A∣dulterer, to see the darknesse, Prov. 7. 7. Ier. 5. 8. These rejoyce and delight themselves, as it were with the poysonous excrements of Sathan, w ch is sinne, Ge ner. de vo∣latil. as the Scarrabee in the filthy ordure of beasts, feeding and fatting themselves for the time, like le e Witches, with the Divels leaner banquet, Plin. lib. 21. c. 13. Natural. hist. or as the Pselli and Marfi in Ital e, feeding on poyson. All these merry hearts shall be turned from their forbidden commons, as leane as Pharaohs kine, for with Ephraim, Hos. 7. They are as a Dove de∣ceived, without heart, forced with Salomon to con∣fesse, their mirth is madde, Eccles. 2. 2. I sayd of laughter its mad, and of myrth what doth it? But aske the godly man, who hath tasted the first fruits of the Spirit, and how gracious the Lord is, and hath drunke a full draught at the fountaine of mercy, hee rejoyceth in nothing but CHRIST and him crucified, ouerjoyed and as it were rapt in an extasie, in the fight of heavenly things, as Stephen, Acts 7. 56. and Paul, 2 Cor. 12. And David dances before the Arke, rejoycing to see the peoples forwardnesse in Gods service, Psal. 122. 1. And the Martyrs have joyfully gone singing, to be devoured of that furious Idoll of the Persians; the godly mans delight is to exer∣cise himselfe with David in the law of God, Psal. 1. 3. and with King Alphonsus, reading over the Bible, 14. times every yeare. These and such, are ioy to the Sain s of God; for even as wicked men do often feele in their conscience & soules, the very fl shings of hell fire, out of which, they often make a desperate leape, as the Fish out of the pan into the fire; so the Godlie man contra∣rily, feeles the sparkes and reflections of Gods love towards him, dropping from the fountaine of life, The Sunne of righteousnesse, which brings healings in his wings, Mal. 4. 2. hee onely enjoy∣ing the comfortable presence of God, which is the matter of all joy, Psal. 16. vlt. Zeph, 3. 5. These and such fill our bellies with mirth, and our mouthes with laughter, more comfort in this fasting, than others feasting; in this weeping, than others singing; more comfort in Gods counte∣nance, than in all the corne and wine, Psal. 4. 6. the lusts and licentious liberties of wicked men, which have madnesse a spirituall bedlam in their hearts, while they live, and in the end goe downe to the dead, Eccles. 9 Secondly, seeing this Duety is re-urged, and that not onely in particular but to be performed of all Nations, of all People; as ver 1. and Prayse the Lord in the great congregation, and in the con∣gation of Saints, &c. It stands to condemne the so∣litary and sequestred life of Anchorites, Here∣mit s, and Monasticall votaries, whose life hath beene so much admired, and commended, by le∣rome and others of the Fathers, and is in such e∣steeme with the Papists at this day, as accompted meritorious, and a state of perfection; like the dreame of the Esseni among the Iewes, where wee see how they have forgotten that of God him∣selfe, Gen. 2. 18. It is not good for man to be alone, and as the God of Nature, hath appoynted in the body naturall, one member to be an helper unto another; so wisely disposing their offices, that one of them cannot say unto another, I have no neede of thee. 1 Cor. 12. 10. So in the body politick and Ecclesiastick, one to be unto another; As the healthfull blinde man to the weak lame man, Simi . the one imploying his strength, the other his sight in their journey. Man is not made for himself, in his kinde of life, a man may in some sort be hindered frō doing evill, but he is likewise kept from do∣ing good, He cannot reioyce with them that reioyce, Rom. 12. nor praise the Lord among his Saints; or be an instrument for a publique good, or as a candle upon a candlesticke to shine to others, his life is hid under a bushell, and Cloystered in a de∣sart, sequestred from the society of men; as if the law of Nature had enioyned us, to have our conversation with Birds and Beasts, dam∣ming in a preposterous stopage, that light which should have done good to the world, and which by it, may be rightly challenged of thee, as it was with Saint Francis, Bucchius de conformitate Franciscu & Christi. Paulus Thebanus, and Simeon Stiliotes, those famous, or rather infamous An∣chorites, which as the Papists are bold, or rather impudent, Vide Perkins his demonstra∣tion of the pro∣bleme, title Monkes. to say of some of them, They trans∣gressed no one jot of the Law; some of them compared with CHRIST, and in many things (according to their blasphemie) exceeding him: What is this, but flat impiety, grosse superstition, not warrantable by the word of God, where one day it shall be sayed to these will-worship∣pers, Who hath required this at your hands? Isa. 1. 12. The third, shewes the lawfull and laudable use in praysing God, by singing Psalmes, which are certaine songs composed by holy men, upon severall purposes out of the word of God, com∣mended unto us by precept, Iames 5. 13. Is any merry, let him sing Psalmes, it is Gods ordinance, binding all sorts of men to the practise thereof, Make a toyfull noyse unto God all yee lands, Psal. 66. 1. and 92. 1. and 135. 3. God allowing us, no o∣ther recreation to shoulder out this, as most doe, and this we ought to doe, as our daily exercise, in our families, Psal 101 1. 2 I will walke in my house with a perfect heart, in our Churches and congregations, where and when Christians meet together, 1 Cor. 14. 26. Ephes 5 19. Singing and making melodie in your hearts with Psalmes, &c. Now consider further, that wee may tune up a pleasant harmony, as a sacrifice of rest and accep∣tance, to the God of Iacob. Foure things are required in our spirituall singing. First, wee must not babble them over Parrot∣like or as the ignorant Papist, Psal 47. 7 1 Cor. 14 gallops over his Ave Maries, and Pater Nosters, but with under∣standing, that we may teach and admonish either our selves or others with profit. Secondly, wee must sing with grace in our hearts, that is in exercising and stirring up the graces of God in our hearts, as our loy, Faith, Love, confidence, and commemoration of Gods benefits, either in giving or forgiving, kindle∣ing our dead zeale, as a fire with bellowes, 2 Tim 1. 6. Thirdly, wee must sing with our hearts, not onely tongues and voyces, but with a zealous de∣sire, by our singing to glorifie God, Psal. 47. 7. Sing yee praises with understanding, Psal. 118. 27, Bind the Sacrifice with cordes to the hornes of the Al∣tar; hence wee are sayd to prepare our hearts, 1 Cor. 14. 14 Thus David bids his Lute, Grinaeu super col. 3. 16. his Harpe, his glory, his tongue, to awake, Ps. 57. 8. he would not have his heart sleeping, while his tongue is walking and waking, for— Non v x sed votum, non musica chordula, sed cor, non cantans sed amans cantat in aure Dei. Tis not thy voyce but vowe, not well tun'd harp but heart, Not sound but solid love, mirths in Gods hearing part. The fourth is, to sing to Gods glory, with an holy remembrance of his awfull and Majesticke presence; and this is that, which is observed by Cramerus, In tertia classe scholae Prophe∣ticae, & vatici∣nio sexto, ex Psal. 22 that if our doxologies and thankesgi∣vings be acceptable, they must begin from God, as the first mover and primus moter of his owne praise, they must be of God as the matter and ar∣gument of all our songs, they must be with him, as the end and scope of all our Hosannaes of mer∣cy, and Hallelu-jahs of praise; thus making him the efficient, materiall, formall, and finall cause of all our service, joyned together by the Prophet, Ps. 86. The Spirit of God makes ou pipes to g . Macarius ho. 47. 4. R ioyce the Soule of thy servant, &c. First, in that he would his soule to be made joyfull, hee desires God to move it to that duety. 2. Where he calls God, hee shewes the matter of his Psal∣modicall melody. God is the bel∣lowes, wee the Organs. Athe∣nagoras, orat. pro Christ. 3. The listing up of his heart unto God, hee intimates his end and marke. And lastly, to whom hee dedicates his Mu∣sicke. To teach all Christians a conscionable dili∣gence in this duety, Vse 1. all creatures in theyr kinde, blesse their Crea or, even they that want tongues, as Sunne, Moone, Starres, &c. Psal. 148. The unreasonable creatures giue with their tongues obedient testimonies thereof; the Birds of the ayre sing, beasts of the field make a noyse, even the hissi gs of Dragons in the deepe, are Psalmes of prayse unto God. Praise thou the Lord the with the best member thou hast, which is thy Torgue, the Eye is to see for all, the Eare to heare for all, the Hand to worke for all, the Nose to smell for all, and the palate to taste for all, but the Tongue in the highest office is to sing pr ises to God for all, its every mans duety, as a I must pray unto God, so all must prayse God, and as CHRIST IESVS carryes up thy prayers, being perfumed upon him, the true Altar on which they are offered, so will hee doe thy Psalm s of praise, being winged with holy devotion, this is thy heavenly melody, the mirth of thy fami∣ly, aromaticall perfume of thy ch mber, an ho∣ly homage to God, the sacrificed calves of thy lips. If thou hast then beene a Mute and tongue∣tyed in this duety, (though thou be opposed therein, by th prophane world, and Sathan∣stand at thy right hand, as he did against Sacrifi∣zing Iehoshua, Zach. 3. 2.) be now as a speaking vowell, or at least a consonant, to Stentorize the prayses of thy God, even with a lowd voyce, Psal. 34. Continually while thou livest, Psal. 104. 33. Before the morning watch, Ps. 119. 147. At mid∣night and seaven times a day, ver. 164. Thy mouth daily rehearsing his righteousnes and Satvation, Psal. 7. 15. Let his Statutes be thy Songs in the house of thy Pilgrimage, Psal. 119. 54. Learne to tune thy voyce here on earth, that thou mayst have a place among the Psalmodicall quier of Heaven, acquaint thy heart with spiri∣tuall mirth, sing Davids Ps lmes, that thou mayest have Davids spirit, it thou wilt not sing unto God, Qui fecit lin∣guam vt neces∣sariā, postulet ut creat m. take heed least in his justice, he deprive thee of thy blessing of peace, mirth, and liberty; either taking away thy tongue, which hee made for the same purpose, and the service of which, hee re∣quires; or cause thee to sing his songs in a strang land, as he dealt with the Iewes, Psal. 137. for their vnthankefulnesse. Lastly, Ʋse, 2. this reproveth the usuall vanity of flesh and blood. First, in vaine layes, which are sung to the world. Secondly, lascivious B llads, which are tuned to the flesh. Thirdly, Satyricall libels to the Divell. All w ch , are to ex lt and strength∣en, the three Goliha's, and great enemies of mans Salvation, even to sing praises to the cur d Tri∣nity of H ll; Fumus & so∣mes luxuriae & cibus Diaboli: these are the fuming and fomenting nourishment to Luxurie, the Bellowes to blow the embers of lust, the Palate-pleasing meate of the Serpent, their originall from odome, not S ∣on; from Bedlam not Beth'lem; from Bethaven not Bethel; from Iericho not Ierusalem; from the Tap∣house not the Temple, the well-befi ting accou∣trements and vaine garbe of the children of vani∣ty. And yet we see the world admiring, flesh and blood inventing, the Divell brewing and b o ∣ching, the Sonnes of the earth ex lting, & defend∣ing these hell-bred Sonnets, having the packet of their braines so full fraught with them, that they have left no roome for the Lords Psalmes? What is this bu to b il up the Kingdome of darknes, and to make ungodly Proselites, for the grea Cham and Prince thereof. These be Sathans watchfull Vaites, Ʋiv hant ut la∣tr nes; sed ho∣norab antur ut Martyres E∣pist. 63. which though they be estee∣med, as Augustine spake of the Donatists (who in his time lived as Theeves, but were honoured as Martyrs) yet here they are condemned, as the spu ious off-scowring of men, not praysers of God, but Organs and Organous provokers and movers to all uncleanenesse. And this is a Loidoramastick to libellers, whose malicious tongues and pennes, writing in blood, (as Draco writ his lawes) are set on fire by Hell, whose mouthes are like the gate of the Temple called Shallecheth, out of which they cast the filth of the Temple; So they the foule aspersions of shame upon the persons of the Innocent. Pie debes D ∣mino ex ultars, si vis mundo in∣sultare. But consider beloved, and learne by insulting over these, rightly and holily to prayse God, let o filthy communication proceede out of your mouthes, least the Mouth, the Messenger of the heart, bewray an ancleane fountaine, Evill words corrupt good manners. Rolloc. super Coll. 3. 16. 1 Cor. 15. Ratio habenda est Sermonis cum non sit in eo parum momenti ad animū afficiendum aliquo modo vel ad mores corrigendos vel corrumpendos. Thy words worke not in vaine upon the affections of the hearers, but either cor∣rect or corrupt their man e s It is on ly the Word of God, which is eternall life, Iohn 6 68. which ministreth grace to the hearers. Learne then to speake the language of Cannan, Isa. 19. 18. for a word fitly spoken is like Apples of gold in pictures of silver, Prov. 25. 11. Then to conclude this Treatise of praysing the Lord, Hugo Card. with Hugo, because he is, Creator ad esse, which gave us our being, Conservator in esse, preserving us in that being, Recreator in bene esse, restores us being fallen, into a better, Glorificatur in optimo esse, will glorifie us with the best being of all, at the day of the Lord IESVS. To whom with the Father of mercies, and the Spirit of comfort and consolation, be ascribed and given, all Praise and Thankesgiving, both of Nation and People, Iew and Gentile, now and for evermore, Amen. FINIS.